# Alan Sparhawk :: The Aquarium Drunkard Interview

**Alan Sparhawk — The Aquarium Drunkard Interview** · _2024-10-01_ · by Jason Woodbury · `interview`
**Tags:** Low, Alan Sparhawk, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2024/10/01/alan-sparhawk-the-aquarium-drunkard-interview/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://alansparhawk.bandcamp.com/album/white-roses-my-god

## Body

Alan Sparhawk has spent decades experimenting and pulling at the edges of his music, intent on expanding its scope ever-wider. He’s best known as one-half of Low, which he shared with his wife Mimi Parker until her untimely death in 2022 at aged 55. Together, they made thirteen extraordinary studio records and cultivated a truly unique sound, brimming with emotion and curiosity, and, on their latter releases, relentless experimentation and electronic manipulation. But, among all of that, there’s an earnestness in Low’s lyrical themes and turns of phrases that allow audiences to feel deeply connected to them. 

That sense of connection is a driving current throughout Sparhawk’s electrifying debut solo record White Rose, My God, released under his given name via Sub Pop. Dynamic, sometimes haunting electronic beats, flickers of guitar, and commanding melodic structures effectively establish an evocative world in which Sparhawk features in disguise, his cadence distorted with different degrees of pitch-shifting. Given the direction Low had ventured down with Double Negative and Hey What, the continuation and expansion on this tonal sensibility makes complete sense. White Roses, My God feels like the natural evolution of Sparhawk’s musical expression in light of losing Parker. As ever, the lyrics—sparser, but nonetheless impactful—are immediately captivating and shattering: “Heaven, it’s a lonely place if you’re alone/I want to be there with the people that I love,” he sings on “Heaven”, the final single and insight into the record ahead of its release. 

Speaking to me from his dining room table in Duluth, Sparhawk graciously and generously explored the various paths that steered White Rose, My God. Our conversation delves into the ways that altering his voice with a pitch controller facilitated a space for him to unselfconsciously tap into his emotions, the joy of improvising with beats at home in the early stages of the record’s lifespan to the moment when the music went from being a private and personal pursuit to sharing it with friends and family for the first time. Grief was an inevitable point of discussion as it is a founding element to much of Sparhawk’s latest material, he spoke about how that aspect informed the record and inspired new ways of working and much more. | z hedderman

Aquarium Drunkard: Hey Alan, I’m speaking to you from Dublin, Ireland which is where the European leg of your tour starts in November. I’m really looking forward to the show.



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Alan Sparhawk: Yeah, yeah. There’s got to be a term for that; where you’re starting off a whole tour campaign with one of the biggest cities that you play! Dublin’s been a very good town to us in the past so it’s a little bit daunting to be showing up there first. We’re working on [the set], we’re rehearsing a lot. 

AD: I’m really excited to see how your new record, White Roses, My God comes to life and looks on stage. What has the experience and process of developing the live shows been like for you?  

Alan Sparhawk: It’s really been kind of different for me. In the past, even if we had made a record that’s really different and out sounding, like the last few Low records, usually the songs still came out of Mim and I with the guitar, just strumming chords and putting together some melodies.

This record, I wrote it and recorded it really differently. It’s more improvised. The record is more so capturing the moment as it would happen. I would just hit record and run the computer for a while and I would mess with the tool; going to synthesizer, the drum machine and the vocal effect. Whenever I would find something that seemed like there was this hold to it or there was some light to it, I would make a mental note and go back later and look to see if there was something there. The songs were built out of that. With some songs, it’s more obvious that I’m kind of stabbing around at randomness and every once in a while hitting on things. Then, some of the songs are more pointed and they came out of me that way, which I guess comes from a lot of time spent with it. 

It’s been weird to go back and be like, ‘Okay, well, how do I recreate something that was spontaneous?’. It’s a very different way of going about it. I’ve spent a little time messing with technology. That’s a little fresh to me, trying to use technology to reproduce and create a live situation. It’s really weird to go from something that was very private and searching and opening the window and seeing what’s going to come out of me. It’s really strange to switch from that and have to reproduce that and control it, or control the parameters. I think I’ve found a way to do it; it’s loose and feels a little more immediate and my son is going to be playing bass with me.

It’s been interesting because there’s definitely a few moments where like, ‘Okay, well, what did I say there? How did that happen? Oh, yeah, I guess I waited two and a half beats there before I started this,’ going back and picking apart a little bit of what happened, you know. Some of the songs are easier and a little more flexible. But, yeah, I found some ways to do it. It’s definitely a new way to perform for me. 

AD: I’m interested to hear you mention that the record was built from a lot of improvisation because I wanted to ask you about your general approach to these songs. I love how textured and dynamic the record is from start to finish and, in particular, a song like “I Made This Beat” captures that mode of sitting down to mess around with tones and beats and make something in the moment. I was hoping to hear about the split between sitting down with intention versus exploration and how that informed the record and how much you enjoyed that approach?

Alan Sparhawk: Oh yeah, for sure. A lot of ideas came out of the fact that I was working from a very simple setup. I had a Roland drum machine and a Novation synthesizer. You can get the synthesizer to arpeggiate or kick out notes and phrases in time with the drum machine. There’s something really exhilarating about that. I don’t know if it’s because there’s something really humanly exhilarating about hooking-up two machines and getting them to talk to each other. You’d think that would be very cold but there’s something, I think maybe because there’s a human part of us that’s like, “Oh, I plugged those things together. I got them to talk together.” There’s something deeply satisfying about that. To realize, “Hey look, when I turned this over here it makes this thing!” It’s kind of an explosion of human interactivity with technology. The key was just to keep it to just two very simple tools. 

With electronic music especially, the palette is so wide open. You can make any sound you imagine and beyond. I find most joy and most inspiration out of just taking one thing or two things and asking, “What are their limits? What do these things do? What are the parameters of this thing?” Then, you start fiddling with it, moving its possibilities around until you find something that clicks and that resonates with you. You feel when it’s right and that can be really exhilarating. It’s really exciting!

Having the microphone with the pitch controller already set and linked to the synthesizer and when you hear something exciting to be able to grab the mic and then just go with what’s coming out and to now go back to what things have come out of it. There was a little bit of that element of sitting with the guitar at night, mumbling in the corner trying to come up with something. It’s a similar thing where you’re grabbing onto a couple of simple parameters and moving them around a little bit; see what this does, see what that does. It really is about finding a couple simple tools and then maybe there’s something about that that then amplifies the human interaction with it because you become really aware of the choices that you’re making.

AD: As well as being able to test the capabilities of the technological and instrumental elements, there’s also the you component to the music. How was that aspect to the making of the record; pushing yourself and the parameters of how far you wanted to explore and express in the music? 

Alan Sparhawk: Well, having the vocal mic there and having things already recording and being able to respond to what the machines are doing and feeling of “Okay, this is something…” and then being able to be like, “Okay, what’s coming out of me?” There’s a lot of room.

There’s something about the pitch correcting too, you know? As a singer, when you’re singing, you have this collection of things that you’re keeping track of: What am I singing? What are the words? I’ve got to hit my phrasing. What is the melody? And, at least for me, a lot of that space is taken up with trying to keep track of what I’m singing and making sure I sing the notes right. You can have all kinds of ideas and you can know the song, but when you go to hit your thing and you can’t hit your notes, the message gets lost and clouded. Traditionally, it would take a lot of effort and a lot of brains and conscious space for me to pay attention to what I’m singing and to be able to sing well. 

When you sort of ease on that and you’re like, “Okay, well, I know I need to go up here and do this and this and this kind of thing and maybe I’ll end with a thing that goes wild.” But knowing that this machine is making sure that you hit all the notes that really frees up that table space for you. What ends up happening is that space gets filled with spontaneity and a lot of room for improvisation. I felt like ideas and words would come faster because I wasn’t having to keep track of whether I was hitting the notes perfectly. You know, someone could be like ‘What’s going on there? Is that cheating, are you taking the easy route?’.

But, I mean, a saxophone is basically doing the same thing. A horn player, when they’re blowing on that reed, they’re like, “Well, here’s kind of the note I want to do and maybe I’ll go up to this note and I’m going to go over here and do this little fluttery thing that I do on this key,” and so on.  What’s happening is that the horn player is just thinking about what they want to do and they’re going to do that. There’s some muscle memory in the fingers knowing what they have to hit to make a particular note. The valves are doing the work of making sure the notes hit, you still have to kind of get there as well with the mouthpiece but the valves are what’s telling the horn like, “No, this is the note we’re making and now this is the note we’re making.” The horn player has to get around there and get the horn to move a little bit so that it can make that note. With this voice pitch thing, what it’s doing is just locking that in and what happens, like I said, is that it opens up the capacity to pay attention to what you’re saying, your phrasing, which is huge and again, the ability to be spontaneous, I really found that to be really surprising. 

I can only attribute it to the fact that your brain is freed up now with more capacity to be like, “What do I need to do right in this moment?” It can be really exhilarating. I’ve been in bands where the vocals sometimes are a little improvised or like have a loose concept. I’ve been in the middle of performances with bands where something would start coming out of my mouth and I didn’t know what it was, it would just be a thing. Sometimes it’d be words, sometimes it’d be very specific words and sometimes it was just sound. There’s a spectrum there of what’s valid as far as vocals go and it’s really interesting to visit the extremes of possibilities; words, the voice and singing. There’s a lot wider of a possibility there. I mean, we put effects on drums and guitars and we can make an instrument sound like a completely other instrument with different things. But in terms of the voice, it’s only been the last decade or two where people are really going like, “How do we fuck with a voice? What are the other sounds this can make?”

Between Cher and T-Pain, and more as well, you get a few people manipulating the voice and at first it seems like a novelty or a gimmick. But, I found it really useful, very expressive. I feel like things came out of me that would not have come out of me if I’d been listening to my own voice. I imagine it’s like when an actor puts on a costume and takes on a different role. There’s something about finding yourself in there and you find that you have a lot more resource for speaking with that voice. Being inside that costume, you find you’re able to express deeper things, things about your true self through that disguise.

AD: Yeah, absolutely. The way you’re describing the voice pitch, it’s also like your voice is out of your body having a kind of outer-vocal-experience, if you will. It makes me think of certain instances where a pitch or effect on vocals can create a sort of privacy or intimacy for the performer because for the listeners, it requires extra attention to hear what’s being said with extra care and attention being afforded to the work. It creates another dynamic to the listening experience where you can have a closeness to the music but there’s a remove, as well. Which is what you were saying was very helpful for saying things that you were almost surprised to hear back.

Alan Sparhawk: Oh, that’s interesting. That’s really well said. Yeah, it was a surprise. I wasn’t looking to make a record and I wasn’t looking to be like, “I’m tired of this. I want to find a different sound.” It just happened to be technology was around and my kids were fiddling with it too. Sometimes an unexpected door opens and it can be really surprising. A lot of things that I wouldn’t have thought to do before and it started out very casual and it became deeper and had more meaning as I came to it. 

There’s something about being able to sing through a different voice, too. I’ve been singing a long time and there are times when I question that or I think, “Well, I’ve gotten to sing a lot. I’ve gotten to express my feelings a lot. Do I really have… is this valid anymore?” Maybe someone else needs to be the voice in the room. So, it’s been weird and losing Mim, of course it makes sense, but I was really surprised at how stifled and disorienting it was to try to sing again by myself.

It’s more than just hearing that other voice and it’s more than just having someone who would always make whatever I would write sound amazing. There’s a confidence that you get from the people that are close to you. There’s a strength that you get from the people who believe in you and when that’s been compromised and you lose someone who’s very key to that… It’s understandable, but it’s striking and almost embarrassing how hard it is to see what you’re doing again and to be able to open your mouth and feel confident. It was weird but I think the voice effect probably helped me to still be ok with myself. 

AD: Were you ever tempted to make the record completely instrumental in the very early stages? 

Alan Sparhawk: No. I’d mess around and find a beat that sounds cool and imagine people dancing to it or something. I think I’ll always feel like there has to be a song in there. Maybe I’ll change, but it’s a love-hate roller coaster. But, I feel like I have to use my voice. 

AD: Well it sounds great across the record and I love how you’ve done it. You worked with Nat Harvie to make the record. How soon into developing and demoing the songs did you start working with them? 

Alan Sparhawk: I probably had about four or five of the songs already kind of happening and I’d been editing them a little bit and some ideas came together when I played them for Nat. It was a few months into it and it was just when I was starting to be like, “Huh, this is actually kind of exhilarating and interesting, and I think one or two of these songs is actually okay.” I had played [songs] for my kids in the living room and they were like, ‘Oh, this sounds cool!’.  I’d gotten a little bit of reinforcement from the kids about it and then just myself thinking, ‘This is unexpected and weird, but I really like it’. 

Then Nat was over and I played a few songs for them and they were really enthusiastic and insisted that this was valid and was really good and that I should keep working on it. And of course, volunteered to help with anything. I did want someone to help with the editing. It’s handy to have someone who’s a little quicker with the technology, someone else for perspective. It’s nice to have another creative person in the room. When you’re trying to figure out something and then someone will suggest, “Oh, how about we just drop the drums out of here for two measures,” and boom there it is! Nat helped a lot with editing and encouragement. There was definitely a time when I thought that it was just going to be a few songs but Nat was like, “No, no! Keep working.” I think that next week, I ended up coming up with two or three more tracks and it felt a lot better. 

I’d already started to have a little bit of a hint that this might be something cool and liked it. Sometimes you just need another ear to play it for, for something to feel more valid in your own brain. I really relied on that part of the process over the years. Mimi would, of course, be the first person I would bring a fresh idea to. That was always really a vital part of the process for me to be able to share with her and she would, nine times out of ten, just start singing along. I knew I had something and there wouldn’t have to be very much discussion. So, yeah, having someone else to bounce it off, sometimes just sitting in a room when someone else is listening to it, can be really helpful for your perspective. It makes you go, “This works, or this part was actually the most exciting to play for this person and this part felt boring.” It’s a good way to get a perspective of what you’re doing. I’m just used to that.Writing is a pretty isolated and dangerous endeavor, but I really do rely on that first play to someone that I trust. It’s always been kind of the crucial moment for me. 

AD: It’s so nice to hear you talk about playing the songs for your kids and you’re also playing music a lot with your kids. You have the Derecho Rhythm Section with your daughter Hollis and son Cyrus. I can only imagine for them growing up in the family home that they listened to and learned so much about music. But on the other side, has experiencing music with them and through them illuminated new things to you on your feelings towards playing and even listening to new things? 

Alan Sparhawk: Oh, for sure. Hearing them make music, you see the gifts that they have. Hollis’ voice is really beautiful. She’s a really good singer, really natural. Her tone is very much like Mim’s. It really makes the hairs stand-up on the back of your neck when you’re in the studio and she’s tracking. So, that’s been inspiring. She has a very, Nat Harvie calls it “dark magic”. She has a very dark magic with it, she’s really natural with music and every time she plays an instrument, she plays drums as well, and there’s something about her drumming that’s very natural and very simple but confident in its own way. It’s really grounding and keeps me grounded. 

Then, Cyrus, out of the blue, picked up the bass and came to me one day asking how to play a Curtis Mayfield song. I had to really quickly revisit all this material that was all music that I knew and loved, but now I have to figure out how to play this Parliament/Funkadelic song or I have to learn how to play this Roy Ayers tune. It’s pretty daunting, but really amazing and also opened my eyes and pushed me. I think it’s made me a better guitar player and opened up a sort of different perspective of what the guitar is and how a band works together. 

The groups I’m in with Cyrus are a challenge for me because I’m having to push myself in ways that I haven’t before. It ended-up being a twist on songwriting where Cyrus would come up with stuff; he’d come up with ideas and then it’s like, ‘Well, I suppose I got to write some funky lyrics for this funky song’. It was interesting to try to figure out what lyrics I could sing without feeling like a poser and would work with this music. And it was fun! I felt like I was able to find some things and it pushed me to write and sort of take inspiration from things that I hadn’t pondered before and that was fun. 

There’s an interaction that happens with music, especially in funk or anything where you’re working together to try to create one thing, certain kinds of music, as a musician you’re listening and you’re trying to play after you’re listening to the drums or listening to the other players and you’re trying to find a place where you all lock in and it grooves. It’s a really great challenge. You have to listen, you have to spend time with your instrument and it’s almost an athletic thing. You need to be up to a certain shape; your muscles need to be a certain strength to be able to get the sounds out of the instrument that you need. That’s really been a good push, too. 

There’s this thing when you’re playing this kind of music and you’re working hard and you’re looking down at your instrument and every once in a while, a moment will happen when you’ll hear everything locked in. There’s something really special happening and so you tip your head up a little bit to look at everybody else and when your kid is tipping his head up and looking at you like, “Yeah, there’s something really cool happening here.” That’s amazing, man! That’s like a second life you get to have to be a parent. It’s a whole ‘nother world that you get to interact with and when it’s someone of your family and a child… As a parent, you struggle your whole life to try to do it right, try to communicate with them, try to be there, but not overwhelm them. You want them to be able to come to you and trust you with things that they’re concerned about, you want them to communicate with you, you want them to know what’s going on inside your brain and kind of be on the same page. When something comes along that really accelerates that and you can sit in this space together and communicate on a very simple, but beautiful and selfless level, there’s a lot of love that happens. 

There’s a reason that when people make music together, there’s a great love that grows. It’s humans working on something together and when it’s working, you look at each other and you go, “Fuck, look at this fucking amazing thing we made.” There’s something so affirming and so promising into the future about that experience. 

AD: I watched a video of you from a while ago where you’re talking about some albums that were really formative and important to you. You mentioned like Pink Floyd, David Bowie, T-Rex, and Suicide. I loved how you described listening to them was like they extended an invitation into a world that you wanted to be part of. I was wondering, as you’ve gotten older, what artists or records have had a similar effect on you? 

Alan Sparhawk: Oh goodness. I don’t know! In the moment, it can seem silly, what you’re listening to, but then in time it forms with perspective later you can go, “Oh, I can see where this had a place in me.” 

I’ve been listening to a lot of Charlie XCX, I don’t know why! I was stuck in the car with somebody who was playing it and I guess I was in the right mood for it and some stuff was really hitting me. I ended-up, for the next two weeks, being in the car a lot and I needed something to get me through those next 20 minutes. It just always seemed to do it. I’d love to be able to pull out some intellectual or obscure records, and there have been a few like that, but yeah, that Charlie XCX record Brat, maybe it’s because the record that I did, I hear in her some of the new things that I was grappling with or manipulating as I was making this record and sort of the parameters that I was working with are similar to that kind of pop or dance-based music. It was interesting to listen to someone using very similar tools but in a very commercial kind of pop way and really liking it. I really like how personal it is if you’re patient with it. There are moments in Brat that are really personal and really revealing and really vulnerable and in a really a beautiful contrast to obviously how loud and wildly electronic it is and almost chaotically electronic. It’s reflecting a chaotic lifestyle and stuff. 

I’ve been listening to a lot of Earl Sweatshirt, too. A lot of hip-hop, mostly due to my son. There’s a few producers these days, the Alchemist who works with Earl Sweatshirt. Danny Brown, he’s a rapper that I like. JPEGMAFIA, he’s a producer doing some interesting stuff. They have a few records that I think are doing some interesting things. My son plays a lot of old rap too, like Outkast. Old Outkast is great. It’s so good, those guys were so good. I think it’s so crazy that they were so good, they made all this great stuff and they were so big in the underground and then when they finally broke the mainstream it was like they were done with it already. 

We listen to a lot of Kendrick Lamar, listen to a lot of the last Fiona Apple record. I think that was really cool. I’ve always been a real fan of the edge that she puts on things. 

AD:  You had a tweet recently about you listening to your local college radio station and how the dJ played Death Grips to Joni Mitchell. I laughed so much when I saw that!

Alan Sparhawk: Oh, yeah! There’s a college station here and the students that DJ are so amazing and I love hearing young people DJ. I love hearing young people talk about the music they’re playing. There’s an innocence and a purity to it. That’s so cliche to say, but it’s something you forget as an older person; you forget that music and art and life, there’s a real and visceral initial reaction to things. If you can stay true to that and not get bogged down with what’s cool and not and just remind yourself to just look at something and think, “Is it interesting? Does it engage you? Is it exciting?” 

Don’t bring your connotations with you. That’s the big thing, I think. You’ve got to listen to young people to be reminded of that. You need to listen, you need to see their art, you need to hear them talk about why they love stuff. At first it seems small, as an old person, you’re like, “Well, listen to this kid talking about My Bloody Valentine! I’ll tell you about My Bloody Valentine.” No! Listen to them talk about why it’s cool and you’ll remember why you like this too. It’ll get you straightened out and you’ll start seeing things around you differently again. Things will look fresh and you’ll start seeing why something is cool and you’ll see what someone is doing and you’ll see the validity of what they’re doing and you’ll see the beauty of what they’re doing. 

You have to constantly be reminded that your preconceptions and your connotations about what art is, you need to be checked because it’s destructive. Every piece of exciting art that’s come along has been a reaction to the ignorance and the conservative mind of older gatekeepers. It’s easy to forget, but you have to listen to what young people are saying. You have to listen to what they’re making and you’ll recognize the validity. It just takes a minute.

AD: Completely. To return to White Roses, My God, the song “Feel Something”, like so many people, I’ve experienced losing someone close and the grief that comes with that and I really loved and responded to how you encapsulate grief in it. You very simply, but profoundly, capture the process of going from asking almost people “Can you feel something?” then proclaiming that you want to feel something, reaching out for help and then at the end there’s the declaration of “I think I feel something.” I found that so aptly described the numbness of grief and how it makes your world just feel so strange and you can feel detached from it all. I’d love to hear about your experience making that song and perhaps the impact the message had for you within the overall context of the record and on yourself. 

Alan Sparhawk: I’m really moved. I’m really moved and glad that that resonated with you because… you explained it very, very beautifully. When you lose someone, there’s a weird desperation in that. That song, in hindsight, you know, that song very much came out of what you said. When you’re grieving you go through… It’s really wild, sometimes you feel things too deeply, overwhelmingly so, and then sometimes you don’t feel anything at all. 

And sometimes we do things, sometimes absurd things, sometimes it’s art, sometimes it’s destructive things—but you just want to feel. Want to feel something. I’m not sure how to answer that other than I’m really amazed and grateful that you feel that and that you sensed that because the song itself is just pure reaction. It was just coming out of me faster than I can think about it. I’m really grateful that you said that, and I’m really grateful that you felt that. 

 

 
 Posted on October 1, 2024October 1, 2024Alan Sparhawk Low The AD Interview
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });