# Chief Xian aTunde Adjuah :: The Aquarium Drunkard Interview

**Chief Xian aTunde Adjuah — The Aquarium Drunkard Interview** · _2024-02-22_ · by Justin Gage · `interview`
**Tags:** Chief Xian aTunde Abjuah, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2024/02/22/chief-xian-atunde-adjuah-the-aquarium-drunkard-interview/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://chiefadjuah.bandcamp.com/album/axiom

## Body

During his 2020 live album Axiom, Chief Xian aTunde Adjuah (formerly known as Christian Scott aTunde) states that he and his band are “reevaluating what we’re playing and why.” The result of that process can be heard on 2023’s Bark Out Thunder Roar Out Lightning. Dedicated to his grandfather Big Chief Donald Harrison Sr. of the Guardians of the Flame and his uncle, renowned saxophonist Big Chief Donald Harrison Jr. of the Congo Square Nation, the songs on Bark Out Thunder Roar Out Lightning are a change of direction for Chief Adjuah in terms of both sound and subject matter. The songs are delivered through spoken word recitation and lyrical improvisation as well as the traditional call-and-response songs of the Maroon or African Indigenous people. The album is a statement of jubilation and celebration, yet also saturated with prophecy and warning.

Aquarium Drunkard spoke with Chief Adjuah about putting aside the trumpet for this recording, crafting his own instruments for the album, and much more. | s bunn

Aquarium Drunkard: I first caught the phrase “Bark Out Thunder Roar Out Lightning” during the second track on the album “Trouble That Mornin’” along with the 15-minute title track and then the duo version that closes the album. This phrase feels like a thesis statement of sorts. Did it come first and the rest of the songs followed or did it emerge while you were writing other songs?

Chief Adjuah: I can’t take credit for that. My entire life growing up, the men in my family and all of the different chieftains that preceded me in our club line, when they speak their morning proclamation to their nations before going out to meet the other nations, this is one of the things that they say to inspire them and to let them know that whatever they may face or see, they have the capacity and the ability to be able to, not only get beyond it, but face it fully. It’s something that I heard as a little boy standing under my grandfather addressing his nation. It’s something I heard my Uncle Donald standing up in [New Orleans’] Congo Square addressing his nation, and it’s something I say when I address my nation. 



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


AD: You’ve said in other interviews that this album is a celebration of you becoming Chief, so I understand why you decided to center that phrase. 

Chief Adjuah: Throughout my life, it has meant so many things, and also, when you see a barrel-chested chieftain on a carnival morning and this guy is representative of so many amazing things for their communities, you associate it with them. So it almost doesn’t belong to me. It just happens to be this moment where it’s my time to take that walk. For me, it was an important launchpad for what was ultimately being said in the record and that it connects the energies and the expressions and the chieftains in my lifetime and the way that they comported themselves.

AD: “On to New Orleans (Running in 7s redux)” is an all-instrumental percussion piece on this album and is specifically dedicated to your grandfather. The song “Running 7s” originally appeared on your 2015 album Stretch Music. What inspired you to revisit it?

Chief Adjuah: To have the Djembe combine and to have [drummer and singer] Weedie Braimah’s voice on it. A lot of the music that we create serves as binding material for the skeleton keys of the expressions. A lot of kids that come into this music, they may not be able to have access to hearing the First Nations or Maroon or African expressions of remembrance firsthand. So these are ways where we can show them those kinds of things, but also do it in an interesting way that captivates the other side of how they’re calibrated. Also it’s built in seven. Traditionally, [that song] wouldn’t be in seven, it would be in four. It also gives the younger generation tools to be able to understand how to stretch because we’re showing them how to place it in four and three or two and a big one at the same time. It becomes a learning rung on that level. But in terms of the narrative and a story, to have a Djembe voice on that is a huge way for [the next generation] to learn what the rhythm is capable of doing. This gives them more of a story of what those rhymes are pointing to in terms of the narratives that are behind it that come from the history of the African and Maroon community in New Orleans.

AD: You perform your own version of “Golden Crown” which is a seminal part of the deep song tradition of the African and Maroon communities of Louisiana and New Orleans, utilizing the classic call and response performance. At the end of the song, the lead vocal gets quieter and fades out while the group of vocals who are responding gets louder and more prominent in the mix. Is there a significance to this shift?

Chief Adjuah: I backed away from the microphone because the idea of the song that I’m singing has got to be carried on. In all of the moments where there is a leader — it is me leading with my twin brother Kiel [Adrian Scott] as the second chief. We were raised in tandem, so he is also capable of singing at that kind of clip. In [another song] “Xodokan Iko – Hu Na Ney,” you hear him sing the harmony under me beautifully. But in that particular moment, we were all singing and I saw him and the flood of experiences when we were small boys came in, and my grandfather came to mind in the way that he would sing that song. His style of singing was always about passing it on. He would pay it out and bow out in that way. Or, he would pass it along to the younger generation, and it would be a little more quiet. Then somebody would get the courage to jump in and take the leap. So it was me emulating that. The truth of it is that it will carry on whether it’s me singing or not. 

AD: I come to this music through other artists who have incorporated Black Indian music into their recordings: The Wild Magnolias, The Wild Tchoupitoulas, and your uncle Donald Harrison’s album Indian Blues. How do those recordings resonate with you?

Chief Adjuah: They’re gonna resonate harder than anything else [laughs]. When I hear those recordings, I can smell the food. I feel the dancers. I feel how people are moving. It brings back a sense memory of how one guy might have approached playing the tambourine versus another guy playing in the circle. The level of specificity and what it brings up in cognitive sampling memory is pretty intense [laughs]. 

I think what’s great about it, too, is that all of them sound very dated and of a time, in terms of the culture of the recording and the context of the resources and lack thereof. You might have a recording of a Tulane University Jazz Festival in some sort of debt [laughs]. The quality might not be that killer, but the feeling and the energy of it might be more compelling than something that’s been recorded in a pristine studio in New York. Those things are probably the thing that I love the most about those recordings: if you’re fortunate enough to capture it in that way, it can be really cool. 

I think what’s really important about this new generation and the way that we are approaching these expressions and systems of remembrance is that we’re reevaluating a lot of things and also being more clear about the roots without the same kind of level of initiation having to be levied. This is why we challenge our non-acceptance of certain terminology and nomenclature around expressions as well. For me, I don’t prefer to refer to it as “Indian” at all or “Black Indian.” “Mardi Gras Indian” is not a preference. You can call somebody an Indian and say, “You’re an Indian” and now they’re forever an Indian, right? When you speak to a person that is a Chee and you ask them, they are going to say what their nation is. That’s not about waving a banner. It didn’t translate; they were instead just saying “the people.” We live in a moment where we have the ability to be specific about cultural things and in a moment where we are being clear about the fact that those things have been disrupted and most people have been dispossessed. They have the ability to say what it is that they preferred to be called and praise their history in a way that acknowledges the beauty in the American experiment, while simultaneously being able to say that they are Lakota. 

I think it’s really important to note that the Mardi Gras terminology is pretty crazy to me. They desegregated the Mardi Gras krewes in the 90s. I was there [laughs]. So to label them that and “Indian,” you are continuing this mode of dispossession by creating this projection that says that it is everything. What it actually is is an African retention system and it cheapens systems and tribal structure. It’s not carnival fodder. And the most appropriate trends that do not take away certain elements of their humanity and their ability to also be African and simultaneously be Indigenous is to call them Maroon. 

If a guy was a liberated enslaved person that may have come from Benin or Senegal or from Northern Louisiana or First Nations people, it was very difficult to tell that man what songs he could or could not sing because he was stepping free! We don’t talk about that part of the history of the music. This music is a radical peoples’ music. It isn’t a singular narrative of what happened in the world, especially in New Orleans at that time. The guy that basically freed those clans of people and rebuilt societal and cultural structures and rebuilt instruments and drums and actually had ceremonial practice and ritual practice, wouldn’t it make sense that that person’s descendants have the ability to deal with translating those languages, so that it be more of a blessing if they maintained them for a hundred years? That gets left out of the narrative. This record is also anchored in a way where we’re dealing with and unending and complicating and updating those narratives.

AD: I know that you built your own instruments to use on this album. Was the creation of those instruments a response to the concept of the album, or were you seeking a specific sound, or both?

Chief Adjuah: The first instruments that I built were always brass instruments and trumpets that are turned in different ways. Even as a kid, when someone would tell me something was perfect, I would believe them that it was perfect for them, but I had the ability to be able to appraise what the problems were. It was fun for me to tinker with my horns when I was young and make adjustments. I learned that you are fully capable of building the perfect tool to be able to communicate what you want to communicate musically, so why wouldn’t you take the opportunity to do so? Most players’ relationship with instruments is that they want the best version of the thing that some other person says has a value, versus a more African way of dealing with it. Regionally, West African instruments have magic in them, and there’s also a level of animism to them. There are players that understand that. You think of a Rahsaan Roland Kirk and his tinkering and imagine if he would have been resourced enough to legitimately build three or four saxophones in a row for him [laughs]. We live in an era where you can do those things since more manufacturers are willing to experiment.  

With [the new instruments] Adjuah’s Bow and Adjuah’s N’Gonthan, the first thing is that, in New Orleans, the tribes maintain the skeleton keys and the stories. The children in this era have their elders’ experience of living things and hurricanes and all these things. Most of the musical instruments that they’re relegated to and communicating on have nothing to do with their own identity. No one is walking into a store and looking at a piano and thinking anything about its relationship to Africana, even though we understand that it does have one. But if you go to learn Chopin or Tchaikovsky in New Orleans, if you are an eight year old Black kid learning that music, it is more likely that you will meet certain types of resistance and have certain types of cultural bigotry and vitriol levied at you. That is the reality of living in a Southern city and America in a space where culture is trying to hold on to the hegemony in any way that they can.

It is also the same thing as a person that comes from outside of the culture that tries to come into a deeply initiated space and is trying to learn in that space. Their peers and children and sometimes adults will probably levy things that make you uncomfortable. Those are very human kinds of exchanges. It is important to create alternatives. When I was a kid, I saw more musicians turned off from music than were actually inspired. Once they actually got good enough to start dealing with types of literature and working their way through music at a serious level, all kinds of biases and terrible shit comes up. 

For me, I thought it would be important to try to build fleets of instruments that also dig into other elements as a cultural expression for a younger musician and to also build them in a way where their predecessors can’t really levy value distinctions about them. In a century, there are going to be new bands that are going to be created and [instruments that] will be built in a way that allows a person to have something that they can really engage with. 

AD: You put your trumpet aside for this album. At one point during the title track, you use the word “trumpet” as a verb and there’s a bit of a pause after you say it. Was that a way of wanting your voice to be heard, rather than the instrument you were previously known for?

Chief Adjuah: When I was in my teenage years and the way people listened and responded to the music of my 20s and 30s and now, I just turned 40. At this point, most people’s interactions with my trumpet playing is — for lack of a better way of putting it — is [calling me a] legend and almost like I’m not still standing there [laughs]. I don’t know how else to put it; it’s fucking weird to me! It’s not to say that I don’t appreciate it. So many people believe that those recordings really touched them. But in terms of trying to contribute things and narratives and inspiring thought and cognition, sometimes communicating through abstraction can lead to a deficit since you’re trying to effectively communicate something that is emergent. Sometimes it can be easy to write off the perspectives of musicians that communicate in an instrumental space, but they can be informed with [an interview] like the one you and I are enjoying right now, people may be able to glean a little bit of the [artist’s] perspective. 

[By performing] words and having the ability to elevate what’s going on from a narrative standpoint, you can create a space where you’re trying to compel people to see alternatives and to acknowledge each other’s beauty. Even when teaching my students, there were moments when I was younger, I would be like, “Oh, he’ll get it,” instead of doubling down and repeating myself about those things that I knew were going to be required for this human being to be able to eat and play music. As I get older, I’m actually more curmudgeonly about shit [laughs]. Because I’ve lived long enough to see what the cost looks like if you don’t get it. So there is a sense of urgency in the messages that I’m trying to give to the younger generation. 

Man, I love my instrument and I love to play the horn. It’s not easy not playing it. But I also have to be honest about it. It didn’t end up [on the album] because it wasn’t heard that way. 

AD: How did your uncle respond to the album?

Chief Adjuah: The first thing that he heard actually was in a moment where he wasn’t physically well. He had a cardiac event when he was in Hawaii on tour. I grew up watching him and Donald was always the strongest. He can endure and has the ability to always have the power and the force to will it up. He also treats his body well, so it was a shock. I had been waiting because I wanted to present it to him and have a moment to thank him for everything that he’s done for us. He doesn’t get enough credit because this is the guy that inspired us and the younger generation and set a standard and a code. He always led with love and was going to be honest with you about where you were in the process and be willing to give all of himself to make sure that an entire generation had a way to learn how to be able to feed their families and sustain themselves and to work with integrity. I wanted to try and figure out a moment to honor him and to say, “Thank you,” because stretch music wouldn’t exist without nouveau swing. 

So I wanted to present it to him, but he was ill. There’s a song that we sang for him [on the album] called “Ashé Chief Donald [Tribute Big Chief Donald Harrison Jr. – Congo Square Nation].” But he was down so I sent it to him early  because he’s going into surgeries and different things. And so I was like, “Hey, listen to this before you go in.” And he immediately responded and levied his gratitude and thanks. 

AD: And he’s doing well in his recovery?

Chief Adjuah: Shit, man, I just heard him in New York at Town Hall. Hiis ability to be able to weave in and out of different contexts are seamless. He can deal with Sidney Bechet’s notes  and articulate them like Don Byas would and superimpose over the harmony like Mark Turner’s deal. He has that many concepts and, from a theoretical and conceptual space, it’s fucking frightening that a person has been able to amass that much information. It’s also partly due to the fact that this is a man that was intentional about making sure that he apprenticed with the masters from every generation of the music. And even though that was a huge sacrifice, what it ended up building from a fucking computational standpoint [laughs] and a conceptual standpoint, it’s perfect. I don’t know how to explain it, like a 12-headed dragon. 

Aquarium Drunkard is powered by its patrons. Keep the servers humming and help us continue doing it by pledging your support via our Patreon page.

 

 
 Posted on February 22, 2024February 22, 2024Chief Xian aTunde Abjuah The AD Interview
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });