# Clarissa Connelly :: The Aquarium Drunkard Interview

**Clarissa Connelly — The Aquarium Drunkard Interview** · _2024-05-14_ · by Jason Woodbury · `interview`
**Tags:** Clarissa Connelly, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2024/05/14/clarissa-connelly-the-aquarium-drunkard-interview/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://clarissaconnelly.bandcamp.com/album/world-of-work

## Body

Sometimes you just want to get away from it all; from the mundanity of routine and reality. Embark on a search for magic. Scottish-born and Copenhagen-based composer, multi-instrumentalist and producer Clarissa Connelly is driven by a desire to encounter beauty and magic through music—that’s her escape. On her third record—and debut via Warp—World of Work, Connelly explores the duality of work and its influence on the relationships we have with the interior and exterior, the psychological and the physical. Within the work, Connelly describes two characters at play: Work and Desire. The former, she says, “reflects the profane, the quotidien” while the latter “exists as exaltation, the body pushed to physical limits, art, ecstasy”. 

Since the release of Connelly’s debut Teach Duinn in 2018, she has become a master of world building in her elaborate compositions. Often likened to Kate Bush and Enya, the influence of both continues here, with elements of Sinéad O’Connor and PJ Harvey also embedded in these dynamic and immersive arrangements. Not to be tied to a particular generation of artists, Connelly also incorporates Medieval singing, 20th Century philosophy, and 12th Century literature into her singular style. Having previously been inspired by ancient Scandinavia sites on her 2020 LP The Voyager,  Connelly’s expansive and expressive work delves deep into the self on this occasion with great effect. 

As thoughtful in her articulations about her artistry as she is imaginative in her tremendously vivid arrangements, Clarissa Connelly, over Zoom, is a compelling conversationalist. Her insights into World of Work span the importance of movement, the power of dreams and the ongoing discovery of magic to be found in her music. | z hedderman

Aquarium Drunkard: World of Work came out, how was release day for you? 



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Clarissa Connelly: It was pretty busy but it was also quite overwhelming. It’s been a long time waiting for the record to come out and I’m excited about all the reviews and responses from people listening. We, my manager and people from Warp, had a nice lunch together on Friday, so we celebrated a little bit. I’m very grateful about it being out and having the help from such nice people to put it out into the world. You know, as one person, you can’t always do that by yourself, so I’m just really thankful for the team around me. I really love working with them, they’re all incredible people. 

AD: Were you reading reviews on Friday or do you get a little nervous even clicking into them? 

Clarissa Connelly: I actually don’t get nervous. I think I accepted a long time ago—and, of course, you have to keep learning—that whatever you do there’s always going to be someone that doesn’t like it. But, this time, I actually only read good reviews, which was nice. I think my manager probably only sent me the good ones! Also, sometimes later in your career, suddenly people can decide that they don’t like what you do anymore. That’s just a part of it. It’s also a tough part of it, but I have a lot of friends in Copenhagen who also write music and it’s something we often talk about; that you can’t expect people to give you good feedback or love what you do all the time. That’s not possible. It’s completely impossible!

It’s nice to read reviews now and for them to have all been good, the ones that I’ve read, anyway. But, of course, I know that it’s not always like that and I think I have a good feeling of knowing that that’s also ok. What you’re doing can’t always talk to the world directly, sometimes it can fit into a particular feeling or emotion that’s more collective and sometimes it doesn’t. That’s just how it is. I just feel lucky that World of Work somehow responds to some people right now. That’s just wonderful. 

AD: Yeah, absolutely. I think what’s so fascinating and compelling about your work, and something that kept bringing me back to listen from start to finish, was how exciting and unpredictable the arrangements are. No matter how many times I listened to the opening song, “Into This, Called Loneliness”, the  piano crash at the very beginning always scared the life out of me. I enjoyed reading about some of your inspirations beyond the record, in particular the quote from the 20th-century French philosopher Georges Bataille: “Man has come to know the exterior world [of work], but he remains ignorant of his own nature. [Yet] if he had not first awoken to awareness through work, he would know nothing at all.” Within the album, you  describe there being the two characters at play; work and desire. 

I’m curious to hear about how soon into the development of this record, thinking up different concepts to unify the songs, did that quote come into it and how integral was it in shaping the overall narrative? 

Clarissa Connelly: The ideas of wanting to write about how movement in music can feel magic to me and give me a feeling of ecstasy, that I also feel in other situations, of course, but that I mostly get through music. That’s something I’ve always worked towards, finding these moments of surprise. That can be in a chord or the way a chord shifts in a surprising way and finding the balance of not being too surprising. You know, find that feeling where the ceiling pops-off, you know? That feeling is really magic to me. 

The questions that I think a lot about, and have always thought about, is whether they are magic or whether they are somehow a sort of proof that we are part of something really, really big and beautiful. I’ve always asked those questions. That’s been my inner work with the material and I wanted to also, not only with the movement in the music and making these loops that don’t really fit but they kind of eat the tail again, to create this movement for me working with that and also trying to pronounce it in the words of the music but not really grasping around a language. 

“Into This, Called Loneliness” was one of the first songs I wrote for the album, and whilst writing it, I stumbled upon Bataille. One of my friends gave me the Bataille’s book L’érotisme because I was talking about it and I’m very lucky they gave me that book because it really changed my perception and helped me find a language about how we move into the world and whether these experiences are magic or not. It was exactly what I was supposed to read at the time. It happened while I was working on the album and then I started being really interested in how he uses work and what it actually means. Because we can’t divide ourselves from the world we’re in. We’re here now and we have to move around through our lives, to even be here or else we will be stuck. There’s nothing in being stuck. I was talking about that in the album, that’s obviously the opposite of being in movement, and that’s when your heart closes. 

So, of course, it’s not Bataille’s philosophy, but I took the words from it and some of his philosophy and then I kind of morphed it into what I believe is how I wanted to express this idea. 

AD: It’s interesting you mention that sense of being stuck and movement because there’s so much movement in the album. I felt that as we’re introduced to the record with “Into This, Called Loneliness”, it’s as though we’re like Alice tumbling into Wonderland and there’s all of these different elements such as the spooky pitched down vocal that comes at the end of the song. The sequencing of the album is so great because it effectively maintains its atmosphere along the journey. On the second song, “The Bell Tower” we hear footsteps descending stairs and as soon as you hear the album’s protagonist—whether it’s directly you or a character—coming out of the bell tower and is greeted by the chiming and clattering of the bells, it signifies the start of this adventure. In this sense, World of Work is such a multi-sensory record. When you were composing the music, did you have visual sketches in mind that inspired how you built the songs? 

Clarissa Connelly: Yeah, that’s something that was also like the puzzle or the jigsaw work throughout working with the songs and gathering songs for the album. Some songs didn’t make it because they didn’t fit into it. It was like gathering the right mixture of different positions throughout life and then I wanted to glue them together. The bells were always part of the idea of creating the walls of the record because I thought that maybe I wanted to write a story. A story always needs a setting, and like walls to contain it. With music, how can we create walls? I didn’t want to talk too much on the album and be like, ‘This is a story about…’ I wanted it to be sensoric in sounds but still using sounds that can set a scene because it’s big themes to talk about and to maybe try make them a bit more understandable. It’s helpful to build walls, I thought. 

That’s why the bells became a big part of it because they’re also how we understand time. It’s our frame of society. In the world I wanted to explain that and sort of zoomed in. I thought that they were a good kind of punctuation in the record. That came into the process pretty early. Also, things that became a bit too silly, like there’s in “The Excess of Sorrow, Laughs”, I made all these characters that are in a marketplace because I wanted to create a bit of a scene where people are interacting with each other and a bit out of it. Everyone is a bit emotionally out of it, but I ended up turning that bit down so it’s not too loud in the mix because it was also pretty silly. But I wanted to have the balance of humor and seriousness so that it didn’t become too much of a funny fairytale. The themes were taken seriously but definitely setting the scene was a big part of it from the beginning. I could have done more but then I wanted to keep it simple with steps and voices, the bell and then using the musical instruments as a dramatic element because that also works to set a scene, like making a bit of a theater. “Into This, Called Loneliness”, in the beginning, that really sets a scene. So, yeah, that was a big part of it.

AD: In your lyrics, I was drawn to the recurring feeling of loneliness versus being alone. At one point you sing, “I don’t know how I got here / but I know loneliness is here” and later on in the record on “An Embroidery” we hear you sing, “I’ve noticed when you’re not here I feel better alone”. I thought that was such an interesting duality within the album, particularly when we connect it to the idea of work. You know, there are a lot of people who work from home and in many cases do so on their own. But, also, for you as a composer, obviously you can collaborate but primarily I have to imagine it’s a solitary practice. Was it a conscious decision to weave in that exploration of loneliness versus being alone?

Clarissa Connelly: Yeah that’s a really good question because there’s a really big difference. I think it’s a lot about how while I was working on writing the album, I was also going through a lot of grief and loss of a family member. There’s a huge difference working towards something, and that’s also where the movement part comes into it. Because loneliness, I don’t think loneliness is a part of our lives once we’re in movement and we are in development and open. When our hearts are open but we have to be alone, or  at least, I really felt it was necessary to be alone and write the record to go through these emotions but not to be stuck in them because that’s when loneliness happens. That’s the big difference, is standing still. 

That happens and that’s also a part of life, but you can get stuck and that’s when your heart closes. “Turn to Stone” and those parts of the record were written because loneliness is a part of life, but it is where we stand still when going through something. It can be mourning, it can also be understanding that we have to change to turn into who we need to be to meet ourselves. Loneliness became that stubbornness. Standing still, not being able to move, where being alone is detaching oneself from a situation where you are forced to feel stuck. “An Embroidery” also was written through that. Whether it’s a relationship or if it’s how you view yourself, that’s a choice of being alone. 

Maybe it’s more like a dictionary definition of saying that being alone is a choice and loneliness is not a choice. I think it can always be a choice, but you just have to move. It doesn’t have to be through writing a novel or writing a poem, it can just be going for a walk. It’s always through movement… it’s the most important part of life, is staying in movement; in our hearts and in our minds. I wanted to try and explain those two differences because I’ve been stuck in between both of them, a lot. Still am, of course, because that’s part of life.  So, I wanted to explain them as differences.

AD: Yeah, and it’s an ever-changing thing. We all go through different periods wanting to be alone and wanting to do the things that make you feel like you can get back to yourself because sometimes being around a lot of people all the time, you can lose a sense of who you are. Sometimes, you feel like you have to perform in certain social interactions or settings.

Clarissa Connelly: Exactly, exactly. Also, how you interact with others is something, like our personality, that we’ve taught ourselves who we are. I think that’s a big part of where I am and something I’ll always work further in to. And yeah, being with others and wondering what they view as what Clarissa is, or what they view Zara is, can keep you stuck. Of course you can also free yourself from it with others but I think it is pretty necessary to, in times of great movement or when a big event is happening in your life, it’s a great time to develop yourself. You have to, because you have to change. There’s such a big movement in that that I think requires for myself to pull back and then write this album. Or go walk the Camino or whatever you can do! You don’t have to write an album to do that. 

Being in movement, that’s really necessary when there are great changes in your life. You have to just go for it or else you get depressed, you know. When there is great movement in your life, you have to choose to move. 

AD: Talking to you about World of Work and the different things that were coming up for you while you were writing it, I can only imagine the conversations you had with yourself about life. Your previous record The Voyager was anchored by you exploring and responding to ancient sites, this album, however, feels very much like you’re the central point of focus of what you were trying to examine. Did you feel changed by the experience of making it? And when you listen back to songs are you struck by the difference in yourself from the time when you wrote the lyrics to now?

Clarissa Connelly: Yeah, definitely. It’s funny going out and performing the album now because I do feel changed from some of the songs. However, there is still the reassurance that I’m trying to sing through. A reassurance that I want to give to myself while singing and a reassurance that I want to somehow formulate to the audience of a goodness that I believe that there is, probably, a greater beauty. When I feel clear about that, and I can sing through it, then it makes sense to sing these songs because that’s the core of them, or the point of them. That formulation doesn’t get old for me, yet. I hope it doesn’t get old for me. That always feels meaningful, it still does now. 

But there’s definitely… I think it’s more than just looking back and knowing that there are some things that I didn’t know I knew, but that I was singing about and that I later found out. You know, things like  ‘Oh, I have to break up with my partner,’ or, ‘Oh, I have to let go of this way I interact with my family and with my friends’. I knew that before I could talk about it with my friends. That’s what’s really interesting about or that’s why I think it’s important to, no matter if we have an output towards others or not or if we want to share it or not, but to listen to your unconsciousness because there’s a lot of things like even  remembering your dreams, there’s so many things that are pronounced before your personality can deal with it. That’s really interesting and I think that’s so fascinating. There’s definitely things that have already happened that I now understand that I didn’t understand before! 

AD: Do you keep a dream journal? 

Clarissa Connelly: Yeah, sometimes. If I’m too busy then I can’t remember anything. But if I have a vacation, I’m going to have a few weeks, then I often start to remember. Or if there’s in-between things that are happening, if something really important happened, that I was really nervous about and then finally it happened, then I can remember my dreams and that’s when I write them down. If I remember them, I always write them down. Then I can go back and think, ‘Oh yeah, that was probably dealing with that situation. I had to deal with it in my dream again because I didn’t do well in that situation the first time’. Maybe I didn’t respect myself in the situation enough so I had to really set boundaries in my dream!

AD: How often would you say those kinds of realizations and moments in your dreams do they become seeds for songs? 

Clarissa Connelly: Well, they often, the whole vibe of a specific type of dream state that I can get into, I think that’s always a part of my writing. It’s like a letting go because throughout the day we can hold on to it or be like, ‘That can’t happen. That would be terrible if that happens!’ Even though we can’t control anything. Then in my dreams, if I’m in a good wave of dreaming a lot, the best dreams are the ones where I let go and it can be of many things. It can be letting go of life, like dying. It can be letting go of someone. Or letting go of the world or my way of going out and just letting go of everything and being completely alone, like flying around and being totally detached from everything and feeling fine with that. That’s a state of aloneness that I have a lot of in my dreams. I think many people have that as well because there’s a lot of healing that we can get through dreams, I think. That sense of letting go, and that calmness, is a big part of my songwriting. I dream about that a lot. It comes and goes, in periods. But that’s definitely an important state that I want to sing about and write about in my songs and the compositions as well. If there’s music happening, sometimes I dream about different chords and stuff and try to find them again on the piano to have them within the songs. Then I have to be in a really good dream state and journal a lot. But it’s mostly that feeling of letting go that’s important. 

AD: There’s such an incredible vastness across the arrangements and the instrumentation. Obviously, I know a lot of people liken your music to Kate Bush and Enya, but there were so many parts on the record where I heard elements of Sinéad O’Connor, PJ Harvey and Jeff Buckley’s artistry across the songs.  I’m always curious to know when someone is making music that’s so expansive and vivid and layered what your relationship with listening to music is like when you’re also in the gestational period of writing? Do you lean into artists who have gone to sonic worlds that you want to explore and create in your own work or do you have to detach yourself from other people’s music during that period?

Clarissa Connelly: Well, I don’t listen to music that much. I’ve had amazing, very very magical music experiences in my life that don’t happen so often. When they happen, I’m like, ‘Whoa, yeah, that’s what I live for’. But they don’t happen that often. When something is really good, I never listen to it too much. I know many people who listen to a song or record  until it’s totally worn out. I would never do that. I think that’s so insane to do because once you get used to something, then the surprise isn’t there anymore. It’s all about those moments of surprise of a specific chord change or whatever. Maybe like five years later, I can listen to the record again. I don’t walk around and listen to that much music, really. And background music, I really can’t concentrate with background music either. If I’m at a dinner and people are listening to a really good record, I’m like, ‘What are you doing?” There’s too much going on, like either I have to listen to the record and not talk to you, or… 

So, I don’t get that. I have never understood that. In a car or a taxi, I’m always like, ‘Please turn off the music,’ because I have to really concentrate. Maybe I’m bad at concentrating on too many things at once, but it’s really too much for me. I remember I went to New York to have some lessons with a composer called David Lang and I also met Meredith Monk. They are two amazing people. Meredith Monk is one of my favorite singers and composers. I think she’s completely brilliant. Something happened meeting them and being alone in the city, and just living and working, I started listening to a lot of records that people had told me about. My friends had told me to listen to and I put it all in my music library and I waited to listen to everything. I had a couple of months in New York where I listened to a lot of music and that was so amazing. But then I kind of closed down again and then I have to find it myself. And it’s not because I’m scared of being a copycat or anything. I just think it’s, when writing, I want to find those moments of surprise myself and pronounce them clearly. And then I can lose hours on the piano because then I’ll try and look for the chords. Then I can spend hours and hours and hours and days and months on that. 

Those moments of experiencing great beauty through music is definitely what I live for. And there are some things that kind of are the same and I think it’s because, I’ve talked to other friends about this, because experiencing your first really magical moments with a song or with music as a child or as a teenager or wherever, whenever you had them, there’s always a search for me to not recreate those specific chords or that specific sound but something that comes close. It’s never like a specific song that I can say that like, ‘That song is the perfect song. I want to rewrite that song,’ it’s more just one chord. Or like listening to something on the radio and it’s a bit far away where you can’t really grasp it, I think that’s what I’m trying to recreate. When it’s really clear to me and the song is very present, then I can understand it. That’s not interesting to recreate because it’s already happened, of course. But something that hasn’t happened yet, that’s a bit impossible to get down into specific chords or sound production. That is an interesting search because it hasn’t happened. Of course, it has happened because we live ideas are everywhere around us. It’s similar to all kinds of things, working with piano, you know, there’s so many things that exist like the way of splitting up chords. I really love that and I know that Kate Bush loved that too. And putting like 9s and 7s in those split chord progressions and stuff. I really love that. That gives me a big feeling of joy when working with that. So of course things go again. But I find it most interesting trying to grasp the things that I can’t really understand how it happened. So, for example, when music is playing next door and I’m trying to sleep in the next door and hearing the sound bending through the walls, recreating stuff like that. 

There’s this song that I’ve never found again, but I think it was like a weird Danish song or something that I heard when I came to Denmark. There were lots of voices at once, like a thousand voices at once just saying one note in a chorus. That chord, it’s not like I’ve tried to do it with my voice, but that chord, it’s a really big chord, but I don’t even know how to find it. I have it in my head but I’ve been searching for those sounds. It’s a long…it’s a forever search. So I try to come close to those experiences when I’m writing.

AD: Hearing you describe that Danish song immediately makes me think of the layered vocals in your song, “Wee Rosebud” on World of Work. Earlier you mentioned creating moments of theater within the record and every time I listened to “Wee Rosebud” I kept noting how that song has a remarkable air of theater in it. Did that song come about in that way of you trying to find or create that moment you talked about with that Danish song that you heard? 

Clarissa Connelly: Yeah, that’s funny. I listened to a lot of Hildegard from reading her Scivias book and doing quick notes like that, because that’s really Hildegard-ish. That was a pretty direct influence. That song, it never really has a pattern, of course, it does repeat itself, but not too many times. But it keeps  going into the story. The words aren’t, that was more like the feeling of, when understanding that we have to change and then going into that change, the happiness of that, I wanted to write that down into words in some kind of way. The sequences of notes, moving quickly after each other, that came after a really amazing experience with a Hildegard concert I was at in a church in Copenhagen. Then I started listening to a lot of medieval vocal music, I just got completely into that. So that was a very direct influence. 

The feeling of being together with others, like with the choir in the background, and then one voice popping out. I wanted it to be like different voices popping out, having a line each. I’ll probably perform it like that, at some point. I’ve tried to with some of my friends and they’re like, ‘Clarissa, we don’t want that,  That’s so crazy to sing that way. We can’t!’ They’re like, no. But I really wanted them too, so I’m like, ‘Okay, Erica, you take this line and sing this part and you can jam it if you want to!’ And they’re like, ‘Clarissa, it’s only your voice that can sing like that. It’s such a strange way to sing’. 

AD: I read that you were in Laurie Anderson’s choir. Knowing that and listening to “Wee Rosebud” and how the vocals are used like a texture, or as an instrument made me think of her work as well. What was that experience like? 

Clarissa Connelly: Well, that was really, really amazing. We were doing Tai Chi every morning and she was instructing us to get into peace. She’s really interested in gathering Chi. As you, as you call it with Tai Chi, that’s like the energy of, I don’t know if you know a lot about Chi, but it’s also in acupuncture. When you put in the needle, there has to be, you have to give in a lot of Chi into the needle when putting it into someone’s skin. My father was an acupuncturist, so I’ve had a lot of acupuncture myself. There’s something about the way that she talked and performed, she has so much presence and it’s like her whole spine is straight, and the way she enters a room is so present and very, very…yeah, it’s like she’s been practicing so much Chi and gathering. Doing that with her, also singing, because that was also the experience, but it was really incredible how she could gather her Chi and use it in her performances. And also while walking around the room and singing, that was completely incredible. I really thought that was very incredible. It’s like having an authority, but not being authoritative. Maybe, integrity is more the right word because integrity is maybe the step that’s within yourself. Authority is the first step out into the room and then being dominating is, of course, being over other people, but she has that integrity. She had a really special way of going about and instructing us that was really inspiring. 

AD: Finally, I know World of Work has only just been released, but I can imagine that there’s always thoughts and ideas going around in your head and different kinds of ideas to explore, whether physical or emotional responses with music. Have you got something that’s kind of swirling around in your mind? 

Clarissa Connelly: Yes, there’s both these canons that I’ve been working on while I was working on the record. I didn’t really want to record them because I want them to not be owned by me. I want them to be…because I’ve been singing them a lot in Copenhagen at parties and I have a lot of friends who have children that sing them to their children going to bed and that was exactly what I wrote them for. But now I feel like maybe I should record them because, you know, once music was spread from mouth to mouth, but maybe we’re not in that time anymore. So yeah, I recorded them with a whole bunch of amazing singers in Copenhagen, there were like 25 of us in the end. 

I wrote them while writing the record because I wanted to sing with friends and explore the canon tradition. It’s so fun, it’s like the songs are games. It’s like playing games together, singing and canonizing them in different patterns. It was mostly for fun when I wrote them. But yeah, they’re probably going to turn into something pretty soon, hopefully. The next record is something I’m writing for at the moment, but it’s a big project. I’m always in the middle of something, probably too many things at once! Some of the projects fall into nothing and some of them turn into something that’s, yeah, something special.

 

 
 Posted on May 14, 2024May 14, 2024Clarissa Connelly The AD Interview
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });