# Jake Xerxes Fussell :: The Aquarium Drunkard Interview

**Jake Xerxes Fussell — The Aquarium Drunkard Interview** · _2024-07-19_ · by Justin Gage · `interview`
**Tags:** Jake Xerxes Fussell, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2024/07/19/jake-xerxes-fussell-the-aquarium-drunkard-interview-3/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://jakexerxesfussell.bandcamp.com/album/when-im-called

## Body

Jake Xerxes Fussell’s output has stayed remarkably consistent over his first five albums – each is filled to overflowing with empathetic and finely-rendered recastings of traditional songs – but his confidence in his abilities as an interpreter and the audacity of his song selection continue to grow.

The nine songs on his fifth album, When I’m Called, out this month via Fat Possum Records, could be categorized as follows: two bird songs, five songs involving travel (“lonesome road folk songs,” as Fussell describes them), one courting song, and one song, the album opener, which is the only known cowboy song detailing aspirational beef with Andy Warhol. Disparate subjects on paper, but Fussell comes from a family of acclaimed quiltmakers, and his hand is steady and assured. Under his control, this very particular group of nine gather out of the vastness of the past few centuries of sung songs, and they talk to one another, elaborate on one another, and thread each other through with intertwined meaning.

Fussell’s voice is open, honest, and an archetypal folk singer’s voice in its hearty enthusiasm – that enthusiasm of discovery, or rediscovery, and in the corresponding excitement to share those finds. But the album’s mood is somber, and there is a subversive quality that creeps in to the music, too. This can be attributed in part to James Elkington’s adept and subtle production and in part to Fussell’s creative process, which he described during our recent conversation. The music is richer for this tension, as both Fussell’s enthusiasm and his willingness to disregard the strictures of interpretation are in service of the songs.

“All you young ladies, take a warning by me / never place your affections on a green growing tree,” goes the couplet that makes an appearance twice, in both “One Morning In May” and “Going To Georgia.” There’s no doubt that Fussell, who grew up under the tutelage of some of folk music’s foremost song collectors, could give us a fascinating lecture on that particular line’s provenance within the history of folk song. More fascinating, though, is his ability to recontextualize it, and the rest of his chosen source material, within his deep understanding of that history. | w furgeson



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Aquarium Drunkard: The first thing I noticed when reading up on the album is how many of these songs were sourced from Art Rosenbaum field recordings.

Jake Xerxes Fussell: I was going through and putting together that list of sources for the back cover which I was always do after I make a record, I try to go through and be as transparent and as thorough as I can. And I realized – it had not occurred to me, really – that about half of the songs I’d either learned directly from Art or from a field recording that he’d made, or I knew some variant of the thing, I might have known it already but then I learned another version because of Art or from Art. So about half if not a little more than half had something to do with Art. Of course, he passed away almost two years ago now while I was working on this record, so I guess thinking about him. Or that was sort of tossing around in my head as I was putting these songs together.

AD: And did you meet him through your folks? I know they were folklorists as well.

When I'm Called by Jake Xerxes Fussell

Jake Xerxes Fussell: Yeah. I knew him my whole life. He and his wife Margo had moved to Georgia in the mid-70s before I was born. They were doing documentary work there in the 70s and 80s. And my parents were in that field too, you know, they were doing folklore work. My dad beginning there probably in the mid-60s, and my mom since the 70s along with my dad. They were both from the material culture world, they were interested in quilting and crafts and stuff like that. But also big enthusiasts for traditional music and they worked with people who were also doing that kind of work. Art and Margo Rosenbaum – you know, Art had been making field recordings since the mid-50s, and then he’d been involved in the Greenwich Village folk scene. So he was just an amazing resource when I was growing up, for a kid who was interested in traditional music there couldn’t have been a better resource or a better teacher. And not just because he was so authoritative about all that stuff and had this encyclopedic knowledge, but because he was the best kind of teacher in that he really shared a lot. Sometimes you meet people who are knowledgeable about stuff and they kinda hold it tight. They have a reputation and they don’t want to fool with some eager beaver kid, but he was the opposite. If he found out you had any interest in this stuff he just wanted to share. That was just such an amazing thing to be a part of. And a lot of younger people who grew up in traditional music and crossed paths with Art, we all had that in common. I’ll meet people – actually when I was at [Austin- based music festival] Wizard Rodeo, I met a guy who was one of his former students. Art taught painting at the University of Georgia for many years, that was his real job, but I met this guy and we made that connection. And we all have that in common – you experience this thing with this person who was extremely generous with their time. It was all about sharing and establishing a community around that stuff. Very special.

Jake Xerxes Fussell: Yeah. I knew him my whole life. He and his wife Margo had moved to Georgia in the mid-70s before I was born. They were doing documentary work there in the 70s and 80s. And my parents were in that field too, you know, they were doing folklore work. My dad beginning there probably in the mid-60s, and my mom since the 70s along with my dad. They were both from the material culture world, they were interested in quilting and crafts and stuff like that. But also big enthusiasts for traditional music and they worked with people who were also doing that kind of work. Art and Margo Rosenbaum – you know, Art had been making field recordings since the mid-50s, and then he’d been involved in the Greenwich Village folk scene. So he was just an amazing resource when I was growing up, for a kid who was interested in traditional music there couldn’t have been a better resource or a better teacher. And not just because he was so authoritative about all that stuff and had this encyclopedic knowledge, but because he was the best kind of teacher in that he really shared a lot. Sometimes you meet people who are knowledgeable about stuff and they kinda hold it tight. They have a reputation and they don’t want to fool with some eager beaver kid, but he was the opposite. If he found out you had any interest in this stuff he just wanted to share. That was just such an amazing thing to be a part of. And a lot of younger people who grew up in traditional music and crossed paths with Art, we all had that in common. I’ll meet people – actually when I was at [Austin- based music festival] Wizard Rodeo, I met a guy who was one of his former students. Art taught painting at the University of Georgia for many years, that was his real job, but I met this guy and we made that connection. And we all have that in common – you experience this thing with this person who was extremely generous with their time. It was all about sharing and establishing a community around that stuff. Very special.

AD: That’s the perfect kind of teacher.

Jake Xerxes Fussell: Another thing about Art was that he was so expansive in his interests. I think he was a polyglot, he spoke a whole bunch of different languages. He really was a Renaissance man. He was as known as a painter and muralist as he was a folklorist. He’d been involved in the New York art scene in the 60s. He had all these different interests. But he was very holistic in his thinking. He didn’t think about the 1920s and 30s being the pinnacle of traditional music. For him it was still going on anywhere and everywhere. If your next door neighbor knew some congregational hymns that was just as valuable as the Harry Smith anthology or whatever. He had those interests until the very end. He was still seeking out different types of traditional music and making field recordings. It was a lifelong passion that never quit.

AD: And were your folks ever song collectors, going out in the field and finding people?

When I'm Called by Jake Xerxes Fussell

Jake Xerxes Fussell: Not in the way that Art was, carrying a tape recorder around. My dad did some of that, a little bit, in the 70s and 80s, but he mainly worked with other people. He was doing a lot of writing, photographing, and also putting on festivals and things. So he worked a lot with Art and also George Mitchell. George was another presence in my childhood who was around doing work in Georgia. George did all kinds of photojournalism and wrote books about non-music things but in terms of music, he was almost solely interested in blues. Whereas Art was interested in blues, old time fiddle music, ballad singing, Mexican migrant singing, all sorts of stuff. But George was a real presence and a real inspiration when I was kid. He also shared quite a bit. Totally different personality than Art. Art was a little more of a scholar, and George was kind of like a journalist. It was interesting to see different people have their different approaches. That was informative to me as someone who was interested in music just witnessing some of that.

Jake Xerxes Fussell: Not in the way that Art was, carrying a tape recorder around. My dad did some of that, a little bit, in the 70s and 80s, but he mainly worked with other people. He was doing a lot of writing, photographing, and also putting on festivals and things. So he worked a lot with Art and also George Mitchell. George was another presence in my childhood who was around doing work in Georgia. George did all kinds of photojournalism and wrote books about non-music things but in terms of music, he was almost solely interested in blues. Whereas Art was interested in blues, old time fiddle music, ballad singing, Mexican migrant singing, all sorts of stuff. But George was a real presence and a real inspiration when I was kid. He also shared quite a bit. Totally different personality than Art. Art was a little more of a scholar, and George was kind of like a journalist. It was interesting to see different people have their different approaches. That was informative to me as someone who was interested in music just witnessing some of that.

AD: I read that on this album you were often writing instrumentals and then finding source material that fit them. It seems that at that point that you’re most of the way to writing your own song. Could you tell me a little more about how that process works? Are you developing an instrumental and as you’re developing it, thinking about the thousands of songs that you know and figuring out what would work?

Jake Xerxes Fussell: It’s funny, that process has become more common for me than the other way around. The way I used to do it was that I would play some traditional song and then work up my own arrangement because I’d pulled something out of it – I can emphasize this thing or it might be interesting to play it this way. It was really just working up my own version of a pre- existing song. But the more I’ve been doing this, I don’t know why, maybe it’s because I play so many shows now, and I like exploring what I’m feeling and hearing, but I wind up messing around with things and I find that I need some lyrics to go with. And so I try different things out. I’ve never been interested in writing lyrics, though. It’s never been something that has appealed to me. The idea of it appeals to me, but actually doing it doesn’t. I’ve never been interested in writing songs in that way. I really admire people who do, and I have friends who are really good at it. I’m in awe of them. But I always found room enough to be creative with this sort of approach. So that’s the way it’s been working the past few years. I do a little bit of both on this record. On some songs I’m more faithful to the arrangement and then on others I take more license.

AD: And as far as looking at an album as a statement that stands on its own – when you do it that way, and when you’re putting together an album, are you looking for groups of songs that have a thematic resonance, or some musical link? Or is an album a batch of songs that you’ve been working on recently that you want to document?

Jake Xerxes Fussell: The way I think about it when I’m going into it, it’s like you said – this is a batch of songs that I’ve been playing lately or interested in lately and there’s not any overarching thematic premise or anything like that. That’s the way it starts. And then I’ve noticed every time when I put the songs together, it’s like a theme starts emerging. And then I’m like oh ok, this is what I’ve been thinking about, I guess.

AD: Everybody will hear their own thing but lyrically this one sounds different to me than the last one, and it took me somewhere different as a listener, so I can imagine that has to happen to you as well.

Jake Xerxes Fussell: Yeah, it always bubbles up in this funny way. And it happens every single time. I think that’s something that just comes to the surface, you know, you’ve been thinking about things. There are definitely some themes on this record that I’ve been dealing with and not realizing that I had been. But interestingly, I don’t really have a lot of excess material when I go to make a record. I think maybe on my third album I had like two extra songs and I wound up releasing those. But I do narrow them down to what they become. And on this one I might have ditched one song that wasn’t really working out. They kinda wind up becoming what they are and then these themes sort of appear out of the mist.

AD: How much of the arrangement work is happening in the studio? You’ve got this great lineup of supporting musicians, and I know James Elkington produced this one and the last one as well. Is it just the two of y’all in the studio and other people are sending in their parts? Or are y’all all together in the same place working at the same time?

Jake Xerxes Fussell: We weren’t all together on this one. I was with Elkington and the drummer, Joe Westerlund. I also tracked some things by myself. So it was a little bit like the three of us were together playing live on some stuff, and that’s kinda the way we did the last record, too. But there was a lot of overdubbing. We’re building the basic frame with rhythm and getting a really solid vocal track. I’ve never been able to overdub vocals so I always do my vocal and guitar parts and hopefully if there’s a rhythm element they’ll be playing with me live. On my last record we did quite a bit as a trio – drums, bass, guitar and vocals. But on this one it was more me and Joe Westerlund, and Jim Elkington was there, sometimes playing piano and sometimes just in the room as producer. But most of the other stuff was overdubbed.

AD: I wanted to ask you about some of your more unusual song sources. On the last album, that song “Washington” came from a quilt or a rug, right?

Jake Xerxes Fussell: Yeah, it came from a hook rug.

AD: And then on this one, “When I’m Called” came from a scrap of paper that you found? Jake Xerxes Fussell: Actually I didn’t find it. It was my friend Chris Sullivan who is an artist and poet and kind of like a finder of things. He collects found scraps of paper. It was something he had located. I think he had actually seen it in an exhibit by another guy who collected stuff? But he had committed it to memory and then I think he showed me an image of it one time. I don’t know what you call that when they make a student write the same thing over and over as punishment.

AD: The Bart Simpson thing?

Jake Xerxes Fussell: Yeah, exactly. Those were the lines, although I don’t think I sing them verbatim. But they’re pretty close. Chris committed them to memory at some point and he’d say them and then I did the same thing. And that was another instance where I had this piece that I was working on. I actually started playing that live when I was touring last year, I was working it out on stage. And I was trying to do this straightforward version of that song “Look up, look down / that long lonesome road / hang down your head and cry.” That’s like a variant from a family of lonesome road folk songs. I was playing with that, and I was initially using that line from that found piece of paper as a space-filler, because something about the rhythm of it worked. And then the more I sang it I was like oh, well, this is the song. (Laughs.) It kinda made sense in a way, and I liked where it went. It was more interesting than the straightforward thing that I was trying to do initially.

Previously: Jake Xerxes Fussell :: The Aquarium Drunkard Interview (2022) 

 

 
 Posted on July 19, 2024July 18, 2024Jake Xerxes Fussell The AD Interview
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });