# Jens Kuross :: The Aquarium Drunkard Interview

**Jens Kuross — The Aquarium Drunkard Interview** · _2025-10-10_ · by Jason Woodbury · `interview`
**Tags:** Jens Kuross, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/10/10/jens-kuross-the-aquarium-drunkard-interview/)

## Body

Before recording Crooked Songs, Jens Kuross was making cabinets, teaching children how to play the piano, and having a lot of difficult conversations with himself. After a series of disappointments (namely, his management and booking agents dropping him) following the release of his 2020 LP The Man Nobody Can Touch resulted in his return to Idaho to lead a quieter life. Playing to small crowds in venues in Boise was something Kuross was accustomed to, but as he came to realise, it’s not the size of an audience that matters; if one person forged a connection with his music, that, in his eyes, was a successful show. In December 2023, that’s exactly what happened when Hayden Pedigo watched Kuross intently at a show in Idaho. That performance, one that Pedigo glows about and credits as the first time he’s cried watching an artist play, featured a contained set from Kuross at an electric piano, sharing his songs with a sincerity and vulnerability that you cannot turn away from. Luckily for us, Pedigo and Kuross managed to bottle the magic of that night on Crooked Songs. 

At times heralding Patrick Watson and the raw emotion of early Perfume Genius albums, Crooked Songs makes you feel like Kuross has welcomed you into his home (where these eight songs were recorded) to let you know that, even after hard times, he’s doing just fine because he has music. The glow of the electric piano, his primary accompaniment across the album, conjures a warmth to these affecting, intimate recordings that seals them with an enduring timelessness waiting to be discovered and appreciated. Having stripped away a lot of the layers of The Man Nobody Can Touch, Kuross’s quiet confidence in these sparse compositions affirms that, thanks to Pedigo’s encouragement, he’s doing exactly what he should be with his artistic expression. 

Aquarium Drunkard caught up with Kuross early in the morning, a few days ahead of Crooked Songs’ release, about re-evaluating his expectations with music, working with Hayden Pedigo and the legacy he hopes to make with his music. | z hedderman

Aquarium Drunkard: I’ve been really enjoying listening to your new album, and I’m excited to hear about your experience making it. When we’re speaking this morning, it’s coming out in a few days. How are you feeling? 



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Jens Kuross: I don’t know how to feel, to be totally honest. I’ve released a lot of music in my day and have always been underwhelmed by how it’s been received. I’m in a different place now, emotionally and spiritually. I’m not getting my hopes up, not in a defeatist way, but in a good way. I’m so confident in the album, and I feel so damn proud of it that I think it’ll find the right people. Maybe that’s lots of people, maybe that’s not a lot of people, but part of me is letting go of that. I’m just proud of it, and I’m excited to get it out there. I don’t have any expectations, be they high or be they low. 

AD: You get that sense listening to the album; it feels like pressure was taken off your shoulders in the playing and recording of the album. It so intimate and so homely, with how, at the start, you sit down at the electric piano and play. Do you think that your approach to recording this and having it sound as intimate and stripped back as it does, along with that feeling that you’ve made this music with no expectation and to do it for yourself, will inform your approach with future albums or EPs? 

Jens Kuross: I haven’t thought about that, to be totally honest. Or, I’ve given a small amount of thought to what the next record might sound like, but I don’t know. This album seems like a statement, like a moment in time. I think it would be dangerous to try and recreate it; to try to make sure the next record sounds like this record. But also, what you were pointing out it has an intimacy and an honesty which obviously I want to infuse all my future work with. I just don’t know the proper way to do that yet. If it’s just another record that sounds more or less the same, or if I expand it, if I flesh it out more and add more instrumentation and the like. I have no idea. 

I think a lot of questions about my life as an artist are going to be answered in the next five to six months because [Crooked Songs] came from a place when I was building cabinets and teaching the kids how to play piano. I might be back to that. I have no idea. We’ll see what opportunities present themselves. It’s the best I can answer that question.

AD: How did you find that period of making cabinets and teaching kids piano? Was it nice to switch off from music and the cycle of making music, releasing it and trying to get your work heard, given how much is out there now? Did you find that restorative, in some way?  

Jens Kuross: I didn’t take a break where I was consciously like, ‘You know what, I need to step back from all this and figure stuff out.’ That never really happened. I moved back to Idaho during the pandemic with my tail between my legs and a little bit humbled by life. It’s not like it was a relaxing vacation or respite from music. It was a period of a lot of soul-searching and confusion. It was a really good idea to move back to Idaho. It was really nice to be back there and really nice to be out of LA. It’s not like Idaho was a place that welcomed me with open arms, or is a place that really cares about anything I do musically. I play gigs around Boise, and they’re not particularly well attended. I don’t take it personally. Whatever it is I’m offering musically is not what the population of Boise is interested in, which is fine. It wasn’t what the population of LA was interested in either. 

It was like A Dark Night of The Soul. I don’t know if you’ve ever read that book, but sometimes you can go through a season where the thing in your life that you feel most devoted to provides you no comfort or peace, but you still find yourself devoted to it. It’s very instructive, on a personal level. I learned a lot about my relationship to music and the purpose that it instils in me, regardless of how my environment seems to be responding to it. Knowing that there’s something very meaningful in it for me was hugely important. I’m grateful for that season. In those few years, it taught me that. I feel more connected to music, and I feel like I have a deeper sense of meaning and purpose in music than I ever did, or that I even thought was actually possible. When I set out to be a musician, when I was 15 or 16, I had no idea what true artistry and true devotion to a craft and to beauty actually meant. I have at least some inkling of that now. I didn’t even know it was something I was missing until I went through that season.

AD: One gig in Idaho that did go well was when Hayden Pedigo saw you in 2023. I was super excited to see that he co-produced Crooked Songs with you. It was so lovely to read his reaction to that show. He said that your performance moved him to tears, which is something he’d never experienced before while watching a set. How did you feel when you learned about his reaction to that show?

Jens Kuross: You know, it was a gradual unfolding. Obviously, we met at the gig. I played, and he was in the audience watching, and he actually asked for an encore! I’ve played, I don’t know how many opening sets for other artists in my life, but there’s been a lot, and no artist I’ve ever opened for has ever asked for an encore. They’re usually like, ‘Ok, get off the stage, it’s my turn,’ and that’s fine. I totally get that, I don’t begrudge them for that at all. Hayden didn’t want me to stop playing, and so I knew that he was either taking a lot of pity on me and wanted me to have my moment, or he was really moved by what I did. The night of that show, he told me he was really moved by it and we connected. I didn’t know about him crying until reading his words in the press materials. I knew it was a good show, but damn! 

It felt amazing because so much of songwriting is just getting people to listen to what you have. That can be like farting into the wind. You put it out there in the void, and you get nothing back. That was maybe the first time in my life where someone actually sat down and really listened to what I had to say and was moved by it. That was in the middle of that period where it’s like, ‘What am I doing? I love this thing so much, but I have no evidence outside of myself that this is something I should be loving so much or something I should be devoting so much of my life to.’ During that time, I was broke, living in a tiny shitty apartment and building cabinets after so many years of struggling and devotion and practice and like writing song after song with nothing coming back. 

I had that one experience where someone was like, ‘Man, your music means so much to me.’ People have always been nice. I don’t think I suck, I can kind of play piano and I have a reasonably pretty voice, so people have never been mean or told me to stop, necessarily. I just never really connected with anyone. For the first time in my life, I had an experience where I had evidence that my music was capable of connecting with people. That was incredibly affirming. I’ve said to Hayden, ‘Maybe we put this record out and you’re the only person who buys it!’ I’d be okay with that. I could go back to building cabinets and teaching little kids how to play piano, and that would be all right.

AD: How soon after that gig did you and Hayden get together to make this album? 

Jens Kuross: That was December of 2023, so it would have been January. It was right after Christmas, he asked me to send him any recorded music that I’d made. At that time, I had a record that I had just finished. I finished tracking it maybe a year before that. It’d been mixed and I was really proud of it. I still am really proud of it to this day. I think it’s a great album, but I showed it to my, at the time, manager, and he dumped me not too long afterwards, and all my booking agents dumped me not too long after that. That was part of what sent me into the dark night of the soul period. I played it for Hayden, and he was complimentary, but he felt it missed the point. He said that I need to make a record that sounds like what he saw at that show. That was so moving to me that he wanted to recreate that experience because it really moved him and the record I had did not do that for him, so that record remains unreleased on my hard drive. It might never get released or I might re-record some of the songs. For Crooked Songs, I sent him the first idea in February 2024. It was pretty soon after that show. I had nothing else to do; the phone wasn’t exactly ringing off the hook!

AD: Did you bring any of the songs from that album on your hard drive over onto this LP, or did you write all of these songs within a short space of time? 

Jens Kuross: I had written them, but had not recorded them yet. Some of the songs on this album are re-recorded from that record because I had played them live, and Hayden really liked them. “Stereotype” and “Beggar’s Nation” were from that record. Hayden really liked those songs and thought I should put them on there. I have another album written right now, and I’m trying to figure out how to record it. But, yeah, most of Crooked Songs was brand new stuff  I had written, except those two songs. 

AD: I loved imagining how these songs were recorded when I was listening to them. The album starts with you taking an intake of breath before starting to play the electric piano, and it’s bookended with an exhale and then it sounds like you’re going to your kitchen to make yourself a cup of tea or coffee. Was it recorded like that? Did you record it live from start to finish, or is that just my romantic visualisation of its creation?  

Jens Kuross: It was not all recorded in one sitting, but it was recorded in my house, which is very small, and so the living room and the kitchen are all one small room together. The house was not particularly well-insulated from sound so I had to do all the recording early in the morning before people got up and drove around or late at night after people were done driving! Most of the takes on the record were early morning takes. I would sit down and set up microphones and play a song, do a couple of takes, and I’d get up and walk around and go to the kitchen, which was 12 feet away and make some tea. A lot of the noise captured before and after each take was automatically recorded because the mics were rolling. When all was said and done and I sent it to get mastered, I asked him to stitch it together, to crossfade all those sounds so that it sounds like how you experienced it. 

Maybe that will be how I do the next record? I will play it from start to finish. Something about the honesty in those kinds of albums I really appreciate. I don’t know about you, but I don’t think I’m unique in this feeling, but so much of the music being made these days is really boring. It’s not because it’s bad, per se. There’s just something dishonest about it. It’s difficult to put your finger on, but it’s music that can be reduced to the ego of the person making it. It could be a massive pop star or a cool indie person, it doesn’t really matter, but it feels like the music is just a vehicle for them to declare how cool they are or ‘Look how skilled I am, look how talented I am, look how cool I am.’ Something about that is dishonest but also uninteresting to me. When I hear music that’s not like that, I really perk up; it draws me in, even if it’s not necessarily a genre I would normally be attracted to. Which is actually why I find Hayden so fascinating. He’s incredibly courageous and his music is completely bereft of ego in a way. There’s something about it that’s really curious and playful and honest.

AD: I hear you, there’s a lot of stuff out there that sounds like generic Gen Z library music that’s made purely to be used for advertising or to soundtrack television packages or videos on social media. When Hayden’s latest album came out recently, I had such an enjoyable day listening to it repeatedly. It was a vital reminder that there’s good music being made by interesting and genuine people. That’s something that comes across on Crooked Songs, especially in your lyrics, which very honestly explore feelings of disappointment and confronting challenging experiences in relation to your career.

Jens Kuross: One of my big revelations during that dark night of the soul period was that the music, paradoxically, isn’t about me. To make an album and put it out in the world, or put on a show and have people come watch you play, is my act of service to the audience. I am in service of the audience, which is the exact opposite of what we described before with ‘Everyone come and look at me and see how good I am!’ I’m really there so you can look at yourself and see how beautiful you are. Maybe that sounds cheesy, but I’ve experienced that. I’ve experienced that where I’ve been in a room full of people, and felt that their attention to me and my music is a total gift. There’s so much music to listen to, and the fact that they are taking a second to pay attention to me and what I’m saying and what I’m singing is incredible. Especially in today’s attention economy, which is a term that gets thrown around a lot, but the fact that people are taking a quiet moment to listen to me is such a gift. If you had asked me if people’s attention was a gift before the whole dark night of the soul thing, I would have said, yes, but now that I’ve really experienced it and the beauty of that is just overwhelming.

AD: I touched on the lyrics, which I admired for your candidness regarding the music industry and your career. You started playing music when you were 15, and you mentioned the experience you had with your management and bookers dropping you after your debut LP. Did writing this album help process that period and maybe bring some closure to that chapter as you move forward?  

Jens Kuross: Well, it wasn’t a different season or period of writing, I feel. As far as composing goes, my process actually hadn’t changed all that much. It’s always pretty contemplative, and I try and get out of the way. I never sit down with an agenda like, ‘I’m gonna write a song about this.’ Whatever it might be, it’s always my subconscious feeding me and me trying to sit down at the piano and be attentive to that and see what comes out. I have a whole other rant I could give about music that’s written with an agenda or art that’s made with an agenda versus art that’s made from a pure motivated space, but that’s for another day. 

What changed is just the way the experience I was having performing them. I had these songs, and like prior to this, I didn’t really know what I had. If I listen back to my older catalogue, and I still think I’ve written some good songs, I’m pretty proud of everything I’ve put out in the world, but something about the profundity of the whole experience had not sunk in yet. Performing these songs, which is how they were recorded, I just sat down to perform them and it became a much more intimate, personal and spiritual experience than I had previously had. I’ve had inklings of that, here and there, as I developed as a human and as an artist, but something about it really sank in during that period of my life and during the performing and recording of this album, and all the performances I’ve given subsequently have been really meaningful in ways that I can’t really articulate. I don’t necessarily expect it to be meaningful to anyone else, but they were really profound experiences. So, I don’t think it was the writing that changed; it was my attitude toward myself and my music and my attitude towards my role as an artist that shifted. 

AD: Drumming is your primary instrument. It was interesting to have that in the back of my mind while listening to these songs because they’re led by a gorgeous glow of electric piano with some subtle synths lending some extra texture. On the opening track and “No One’s Hiding From The Sun”, there’s a percussive weight to how you play the electric piano and land certain chords. As you said earlier, you recorded this at home and had to be mindful of your neighbours. Aside from that, was there a point of wanting to step away from something so foundational to your early experience of music and just have the minimalism of the electric piano and the synths accompanying you? 

Jens Kuross: I don’t know! The drums are my first love, I suppose. But it’s difficult to compose from the drum set. It would be interesting for people to hear some of the songs, like “Stereotype” and “Beggar’s Nation”, which, on the previous record, are fully fleshed out and have drum beats and lush arrangements and stuff like that. Comparing them to the stripped back versions, they both sound great in my book, but because I was gonna do this whole thing live and I don’t know any other drummers that I would trust to pay to play them. 

AD: Hayden referenced a likeness to Arthur Russell in these songs. I kept hearing Randy Newman and very early Perfume Genius. Who were some artists or albums that maybe seeped into your approach to this album? Or, what were you mainly listening to during that time?  

Jens Kuross: It’s funny you said Randy Newman, because Hayden kept throwing out the Arthur Russell meets Harry Nilsson, but another way he described it was Randy Newman meets Grouper. I love Randy Newman. I listened to a lot more Randy Newman than I ever did Arthur Russell or Harry Nilsson. I know Arthur Russell’s record World of Echo, more than his other work, which was definitely referenced by both Hayden and me. I was listening to that a lot. Springsteen’s Nebraska, also. 

This record came in the tail end of that dark night of the soul period, which was very much a time when I couldn’t listen to a lot of music. I could only listen to sacred music, I was listening to a lot of gospel music and I was listening to a lot of masses like Schubert’s masses and Arvo Pärt. It’s about directing the gaze of the listener to something higher. You listen to that music, and it’s not about the composer; it’s about the subject of that composer’s worship. Getting back to the whole ego thing about music, that’s made for the sake of the composer’s ego, that music really disgusted me and I couldn’t listen to it at all. 

So, yeah, I was listening to a lot of sacred music, a lot of instrumental music and gospel music because that was the only music that would create an emotional response. Everything else seemed, I don’t know how to put it without sounding like I’m completely dismissing the past 80 years of recorded music and how shallow it is, but I couldn’t listen to any of it. It all seemed like it was completely missing the point. That’s where my head was. 

AD: I read an interview you gave a couple of years ago where you talked about different albums you loved and you mentioned Blood On The Tracks and how inspirational Dylan’s lyrics were to you. With that period of listening to sacred music, I have to imagine you were also listening to Slow Train Coming and Saved!

Jens Kuross: I like those records a lot. My parents had a copy of Slow Train Coming, and it’s great. I was actually listening to Saved, a good bit, interestingly enough. There’s another ‘80s Dylan record called Oh Mercy that he made with Daniel Lanois, which is also really good. It’s got this track “Ring The Bells,” which is so great. 

AD: Finally, this morning, before we started talking, I was thinking about how your album is called Crooked Songs, and thought of Pavement’s Crooked Rain, Crooked Rain. I was thinking about how, since their most recent reunion and the Alex Ross Perry film that came out not too long ago, there’s an outpouring of love for the band, and there’s a whole new generation of Pavement fans. It’s always so cool to see a band that didn’t necessarily get that recognition in their early years, and it took time for people to appreciate their work. I was wondering how you feel about your legacy as an artist and the way that someone may find Crooked Songs in a decade or 30 years and get a lot from it. 

Jens Kuross: What’s interesting is that, and I’m not saying anything new, but with the music industry itself, there’s a paradigm, or it’s a hangover about what a musician’s career should look like. To say, you should smash onto the scene in your 20s, make a big statement that you’re growing through your 20s and developing in your 30s, but then you should be out of it by the time you’re 50, or something like that, unless you’re the Rolling Stones. The trajectory of a recording artist’s career, or what people think that trajectory should be, is passé. The time for that kind of career has passed, and the industry is running on fumes. There’s some cultural memory, I said hangover, but maybe it’s a cultural hangover of what musicians’ careers look like, that’s coming from people’s experience of what music has been over the past 60 years.

The cultural hangover or the industry itself is still pretending it can churn out artists. When in reality, everyone knows Taylor Swift, for example, is an echo of Michael Jackson. He was the pinnacle of what a pop superstar could be; she’s also a superstar and super famous, and I’m not trying to be mean to Taylor Swift because I think she’s a very hard-working, smart and talented young woman, but she’s the shadow of what came before her. There’ll be another one after her. There’ll be a shadow of her, and it’ll just be a slowly diminishing thing into the night. People will probably still make a whole lot of money off those shadows as they dissipate. 

That’s a long-winded way of saying that when it comes to my legacy, I’m writing songs from the space where I want to write music that other people want to play. I want people to listen to my songs and play them themselves. Will the mark of my success as an artist be how many people stream my music, or will it be how that music lives on in people’s memories, and will it make people pick up their guitars and play it for their friends? That’s what I want.

You mentioned Randy Newman, and it’s true for Dylan and it’s true for Leonard Cohen, the best things about their music is that sometimes their songs are improved when other people play them. It could be Jimi Hendrix playing “All Along The Watch Tower” or it could be Jeff Buckley playing “Hallelujah”. They’re great songs because people want to participate in them. I hope that I can write a song or two that other people want to play. I can hear other people play them, and hear other people make them better! That’s what I’m thinking of in terms of legacy.  

 

 
 Posted on October 10, 2025October 10, 2025Jens Kuross The AD Interview
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });