# People Whispering, Or The Strip Mine On The Other Side of The Mountain :: The Experimental Folk of North Carolina’s Magic Tuber Stringband

**People Whispering, Or The Strip Mine On The Other Side of The Mountain — The Experimental Folk of North Carolina’s Magic Tuber Stringband** · _2025-05-04_ · by Justin Gage · `interview`
**Tags:** Magic Tuber Stringband, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/05/04/people-whispering-or-the-strip-mine-on-the-other-side-of-the-mountain-the-experimental-folk-of-north-carolinas-magic-tuber-stringband/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://magictuberstringband.bandcamp.com/album/needlefall

## Body

Magic Tuber Stringband is one of the most arresting outfits to emerge from the American folk tradition in the last five years. While they spring from North Carolina’s venerable old-time music tradition, they are experimentalists, deeply engaged in the methods of free jazz improvisation pioneered by Marion Brown and Don Cherry, and the minimalist strategies of postwar composers like Pauline Oliveros and Terry Riley. With Needlefall, one of the best American folk records of 2024, these overlapping strains come together to form an album steeped in the landscape of the state of Georgia, where the two original members of the group lived while making it. A mesmeric, repeating melody by fiddler Courtney Werner resembles the endless repeating pine stands of the countryside. The orchestral, fingerstyle guitar work of Evan Morgan presents an evening dance. Elsewhere, scuttling, whispering sounds conjure the small mammal and insect life of the rural underbrush, as the original duo is enlarged by a new cast of collaborators. The record is unsettling and lovely, and shows us what a modern stringband can sound like. | s dembling

Aquarium Drunkard: One of the things I’m interested in talking to you guys about is the concept of the string band as a tradition and as a lineage. One of the things that’s on the album page for Needlefall is this question of “What does a modern string band sound like?” So the first thing I’m interested in knowing is, What does this concept of the string band mean to you guys and why has it felt important to identify yourselves in that tradition even from the start, with your name?

Courtney Werner: I think, first, the way Evan and I started playing music together and also the way we started playing music with Mike [DeVito] more recently was through old-time traditional tunes and I think around when we were first getting started with working on what would become this project we were really excited about experimental improv and we were really excited about old-time traditional music, and especially kind of like the almost repetitive, very social, dance or trance aspects. And so that just as a practice I think in the community that we come out of, which is Durham, North Carolina, which is such a solid scene for that type of traditional music being reinterpreted and kind of living. And that’s I think where we feel the most grounded. Whenever we’re working on things, I feel like I personally just always go back to motifs and sounds that come from old-time Appalachian fiddle style, because I just feel that my social community and my environment where I am most excited about music, those are the sounds that I associate with that.

Evan Morgan: I would add that the kind of scene that we come out of and started in is very strong in terms of this experimental or exploratory branch of traditional music, but also then that actual traditional music scene is incredibly strong and the experimental music scene is incredibly strong. And so when we started, we were going to a lot of old-time jams. Our bass player, Mike, still leads jams and is really integrated into the traditional music community. I would say Courtney and I are maybe a little less so locally. But yeah, we went to a lot of and still try to go to a lot of fiddler’s conventions. And we have a lot of friends around the country that play fiddle tunes.



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


But then also I was really involved in this venue in Chapel Hill called The Nightlight when we were first starting. I was going to a lot of shows there and I eventually worked there. Charlie, who was one of the co-owners, is really into techno and dance music, and that would be a lot of the shows that would happen there, but then also a lot of noise shows. There was this big, two-day, nearly twenty-four hour noise festival called Savage Weekend that would happen every summer. But then he would really prioritize traditional music, and the thing that he always says is that when he first discovered old-time music was that he realized how much it has in common with techno music. Just the kind of repetition and it being specifically meant to be a social form of dance music. I think that kind of sentiment has a lot to do with why we started to play the kind of music that we started to play.

Also Nathan Bowles still lives in the area. Daniel Bachman was in the area when we first started. Our friend Libby Rodenbough, who is in Mipso, which is a little bit more straightforward Americana, but she’s done a lot of side projects that are more experimental. But yeah, I mean, I think it really comes out of that community. And then I was really interested in the idea of the folk process when we first started, and I do still think that what we’re doing and what all these other people are doing is part of that folk process. You hear people talk a lot about learning tunes online. That’s still part of the folk process. Even if it’s not learning directly from the source. We know people that have done that and we did that a little bit. But mostly with people that were already interested in experimental music. Like Mike Gangloff I think for us was kind of like the source fiddler.

I think that like, yeah, old-time music gets associated with Appalachia a lot, but the string band tradition is not just rooted in Appalachia. It’s also in Texas, in Missouri, in Arkansas, Georgia, all across the country, and not even just confined to the South. I mean, we are not from Appalachia. I don’t have roots in Appalachia, I have roots in Georgia and Texas. The string band tradition was never necessarily regionally confined and the bands that were being recorded in the 20s and 30s were doing really weird stuff, if you go back to those recordings. And they were using instruments that are not standard, like old-time instruments now. People were playing with pump organs and pianos and cellos. And if you look at the trad [traditional] scene now, often it’s really limited to just banjo, guitar, upright bass, fiddle.We love that stuff, but also we feel no shame in introducing other instruments and pushing traditional melodies and building upon that.

AD: You guys have a range of unusual instruments that come in and out on the recordings: the pump organ, shruti box, the jaw harp. But there’s some newer sounds on Needlefall, like clarinet and saxophone. Is that new for you?

Courtney Werner: On our first records, it was just the two of us with occasionally someone else we would ask to join for a specific percussive thing on one song or something. But on Needlefall, we wanted to bring in the people in Durham that we have been playing music and improvising with regularly. And so Crowmeat Bob, who is a legend in the Triangle [area in metropolitan North Carolina] and beyond, who is an incredible staple of the experimental community, plays clarinet and saxophone and guitar. We invited him to record with us and he featured pretty heavily on the record.

AD: It’s cool to hear this expanding sonic world, because on a song like “The Long-Suffering,” there are new sounds but they seem to evolve out of rather than mark a radical departure from what I’ve heard from you before.

Evan Morgan: We were trying to do minimal overdubs, get more of a live band sound, which is definitely a departure from what we were doing before, because for the most part before it was just me and Courtney, so we’d have to overdub ourselves if we wanted more than two instruments.

AD: What is the draw of that – the live sound?

Courtney Werner: I think it’s just the excitement of musicians, like people that we really like to play with because they’re very responsive and reactive and creative and push the boundaries of their instruments in a way that is always listening to everybody else and creating some sort of soundscape among everybody that is not controlled by any one person. This gets at a little bit of just the spectrum from the composed music to improv, which we kind of like to traverse: Having more people and having it be more improv just reaches sort of a different realm that feels really special in the moment and that I think also makes really special music when the conditions are right.

Evan Morgan: And everyone that’s on that record is someone that we’ve all played in some configuration together. Like Courtney and I – 2021, 2022 – we would play trio sets with Bob every now and then and Oli – Oliver Child-Lanning, who’s on there is in this band called Weirs that we toured with. We were playing songs together on tour and still play with them. And Mike, we’ve played with in another loose project called Signal Lamp Ensemble that is kind of a long-form drone group. And a lot of these people that played on that record have been involved in that. So it’s this kind of community of people that we have this musical relationship with and wanted to get everyone together to document this musical conversation that we’ve been a part of for a while and see what happens.

AD: I see, too, that you are citing various kinds of free jazz type musicians like Don Cherry and Marion Brown. And that song, “The Long-Suffering,” has for me some undertones of Afternoon of a Georgia Faun from Marion Brown.There’s a sense of something happening in the moment and I was curious to know what the process is of composing something like that.

Courtney Werner: Well, it’s funny that you said that. I think it was actually “The Hermit’s Passage,” which was an improv that comes a little earlier on the record, where we got everyone together and we had an idea of different types of pieces we wanted to go for, even though they were not composed. Afternoon of a Georgia Faun is the inspirational piece that we all listened to before we sat down and did the improv that became “The Hermit’s Passage.” We were just really inspired by how Marion Brown, and that record in particular, was envisioning the Georgia landscape. And bringing people together with the intention of these brush stroke depictions of that landscape in sound. And the restraint to give everybody space, and to just give a lot of space to small sounds that would more mimic natural sounds that you would hear. And so for a while our pet name for [“The Hermit’s Passage”] was “The Sparse Improv,” because our intention was “Sparse! Keep it sparse.” And so everybody is whispering and sputtering and just making the quietest little sounds with their respective instruments. The idea of improvising with a lot of people and having it be really quiet is something that every time I encounter it I find it really incredible. So that was the process there. 

For me, I think listening to natural soundscapes – and I don’t mean nature necessarily, like just birds singing or something – but any sort of ambient soundscape. I think part of being interested in any folk musical tradition of a particular place is also just being interested in the real-time soundscapes of the place in the moment and just hearing how noises manage to parse themselves. So we have done a lot of going and listening to what you would typically think of – birds and frogs and insects – but also the sounds of the highway or people whispering or the strip mine on the other side of the mountain: noises and things. So a lot of the time, Crowmeat Bob – the sax / clarinet player – and I will be like, “Okay, we’re channeling birds right now,” and we’ll both be thinking about sounding like something that’s wailing or caterwauling or chirping in response to each other, and it’s it’s pretty fun.

AD: Some of those natural sounds, like the highway or the frogs, actually do make it into the recording. On the one hand, there are musical tones, like drones, out of which sometimes the songs seem to germinate and then return, but then there are these field recorded noises that also seem like they can function as drone sounds, a background sound. Have you always done field recording? And how has your approach to field recording changed over the last few years?

Evan Morgan: It might be still like a Courtney question, because Courtney does a lot of work with field recordings in her day job work. She’s an ecologist and is doing acoustic monitoring, specifically for birds.

Courtney Werner: We put field recordings in from the very beginning. Taking field recordings as an inspiration and then trying to imitate sounds in them is where some of it started. On the very first record we have got one piece that does have frogs in it, but then we’re like trying to imitate frogs. I would tune my lowest string all the way down and make a long noise.

Evan Morgan: On Wind Machines [an earlier record], we went to the Vollis Simpson Whirligig Park. All of these whirligigs were moved to this one square in Wilson, North Carolina. It’s very windy, so it’s a great spot for them. It’s this bare square, but if you look up above, there’s all these really colorful whirligigs. So we took piezo mics and field recorders and recorded for an afternoon there, and then that became the primary inspiration for that entire record. We’re always trying to collect field recordings that are rooted in places that are conceptually pertinent to however we’re thinking about the record.

Courtney Werner: I think also there’s just always this balance between sounds that feel really beautiful and then sounds that are unsettling and kind of scary. And then we’re always trying to strike that balance in our music.

AD: Have you ever worked self-consciously with images? Because it sounds like a number of musical things have come out of these soundscapes that are sort of inciting for you.

Courtney Werner: I think sometimes visual imagery. We moved down to Central Georgia, south of Athens. For not very long, but for the time when we were putting Needfall together, and there were a lot of planted pine stands and they were planted in perfectly neat rows that’ll be like forty, sixty feet tall in endless rows. It’s a mind-boggling area of the state of Georgia, monoculture pines like that. After so many days after driving past them, your eyes are quivering trying to look at them. That imagery just really evokes minimalism and we were playing with it a little bit and then that ended up inspiring the cover [art] of Needlefall and the title track.

AD: So what is your relationship to minimalism and what was it like composing the most minimalist song on the record?

Evan Morgan: I’ve always found inspiration in the film and music composition of Tony Conrad. I have done a little bit of work with experimental film and have had chances to see some of Tony Conrad’s work, as well as some of his contemporaries. So visual minimalism, not necessarily in painting, but in film is really interesting to me. And then LaMonte Young and also Terry Riley.

I think Terry Riley was probably the big touchstone for “Needlefall,” the track. The Dream Syndicate Using acoustic instruments instead of electronic instruments is really inspirational to us, but also we really like Terry Riley’s tape phasing work. His “In C” being this kind of model for a certain navigation between improvised work and composed work. We’re always kind of trying to traverse a relationship between improvisation and composition in what we’re doing, which I think goes back to the idea of the folk process and folk music in general.

Courtney Werner: Like how we were talking about the intention set for “The Hermit’s Passage,” I think Terry Riley was the big one for “Needlefall,” another example of intentional improv. With “In C,” for example, there’s motifs that people are cycling through at undetermined times. Something that comes really naturally out of the old-time music – Nathan Bowles, Mike Gangloff, and even the more American Primitive guitar type of stuff – is just layering motifs over each other with the different polyrhythmic fingerpicking. Connecting old-time music and the way it’s repetitive with minimalism and then expanding on that is something that we have always been really interested in doing. With “Needlefall,” the fiddle part came together first. It was barely composed, but then everything else on top of it just came together in the moment, and so it ended up being pretty improvised in the end.

Evan Morgan: Tony Conrad and Terry Riley and Pauline Oliveros: I think their kind of minimalism has at its conceptual center this idea of the death of the composer that you don’t really get with Philip Glass and Steve Reich. It’s a little bit more authoritarian or something [laughs]. I mean, Tony Conrad was writing in very clear terms of wanting to get rid of this really classical relationship between the composer and the musician. We also love Henry Flynt, who is ideologically opposed to the traditional classical mode of composer and orchestra. So as people interested in experimental music that really speaks to us.

We’re into this more organic minimalism, which prescribes some boundaries or some kind of conceit, but then gives freedom to individual musicians to explore. We’ve always had that interest. But especially on this record, since we opened it up to more musicians, we were able to explore that concept more fully because before, we had this personal musical conversation we’d really developed over the past few years. But opening that up allowed us to have some diversity and range in terms of timbre and rhythm and musical motifs.The “Long-Suffering,” in particular, was mostly coming from Crowmeat Bob’s playing. He is really interested in this Greek tradition called mirologi that comes from Epirus in Greece. And so we’d done improvising with him a lot in that specific mode.

AD: One of the exciting things for me about this record has been that it feels like the convergence of these different strands. The old-time sound and tradition, but also a version of minimalism that is less “composerful,” together with the more experimental free jazz stuff, like Don Cherry.

Evan Morgan: The thing that we have always wanted to hold as an ideal is some sort of communal musical practice. I think that we have really found that in the DIY scene in North Carolina, and I do think that DIY culture in the US is kind of a folk culture. You go see shows and it’s pretty much the same people that are going to all the shows in your area, and then you go on tour and you go see some people that you’ve met before. For us, the DIY tour circuit and DIY way of doing things have been just as influential as the music that we listen to. I think there is something there that makes it a last example of oral musical tradition in the US.

AD: You’ve talked about the “folk process” a few times so far. What does that term mean to you?

Evan Morgan: It came out of the mid-20th century interest in recording traditional music. So for the folk process, you have this lineage of, for example, one particular old-time tune, like, Bonaparte’s Retreat. If you listen to different source recordings of that song from different areas, they will sound wildly different and you’ll actually hear parts of songs that are called something else in different areas. It’s this transformation of one thing, this lineage of a song or cultural object being passed down throughout time, and because it’s being passed down and not being recorded, it evolves. You can think about that with one particular song, but you can also think about that in terms of the tradition itself: the tradition itself evolves.

AD: One of the last things that I’m interested in asking you guys about is your relationship to dance. The record before this one is called Tarantism, which is a reference to a dance outbreak in early modern Italy. You have a tarantella [traditional Italian dance song] on that album, and the opening song of Needlefall has “dance” in the title [“A Dance on a Sunday Night”]

Courtney Werner: It goes back to playing old-time music for fun. I think some of the most rewarding and fun instances of playing old-time is when people are dancing to it. It just feels incredible to be playing live acoustic string band music and have people dancing. It feels sometimes like the fate of the music.

Evan Morgan: We used to go to Cajun dances every now and then and we both really like industrial techno. We both like to move our bodies – not necessarily in very skilled ways [laughs].

Courtney Werner: And something we’ve talked about before is being drawn to the type of music that is all-encompassing and creates an altered environment or an altered state of being while you’re experiencing it. And I think music that you dance to falls into that category – or drone music, deep listening type of stuff that you don’t necessarily dance to but are completely immersed in, whether your body is moving as the means of expressing that or not.

AD: Drone and repetition, which feel like important musical features or forms for Magic Tuber Stringband, I think have the capacity to put you into a kind of susceptible mindset.

Courtney Werner: Definitely. When we’re working on things and we get a little bit into melodic, composed territories, I sometimes physically recoil from it. Trying to have a layered tapestry of a piece of sound versus a linear song I think gives more space for people to fully occupy it. It’s not just a song, where you know exactly what it is and you’re gonna like bob your head to it. It’s something that’s all immersive and is maybe weird or intense and maybe you need to move your body or maybe you just need to close your eyes. Religious music is always really interesting to us too: the ideas of prayer and chanting and putting yourself in some sort of reverent state.

 

 
 Posted on May 4, 2025May 5, 2025Magic Tuber Stringband The AD Interview
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });