# Richard Dawson Is Walking The Path :: On The End of the Middle

**Richard Dawson Is Walking The Path — On The End of the Middle** · _2025-03-13_ · by Jason Woodbury · `interview`
**Tags:** Richard Dawson, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/03/13/richard-dawson-is-walking-the-path-on-the-end-of-the-middle/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://richardmichaeldawson.bandcamp.com/album/end-of-the-middle

## Body

“I’m trying to convince people that I’m a wizard and she always helps,” Richard Dawson chuckles, over Zoom, acknowledging the presence of his adorable and aptly named cat Trouble, who has cozily curled herself around the crook of the songwriter’s neck, perfectly poised like a luxurious scarf. She mostly remains in that position while Dawson speaks about the various themes and influences that provided a strong foundation for his excellent eighth studio album, The End of The Middle. A far more self-contained offering–not difficult compared to its larger than life predecessor The Ruby Cord, which boldly announced itself with the epic 41-minute opening track, “The Hermit”–End of The Middle exists within an intimate space that’s immensely welcoming and warm. As ever, Dawson’s deft lyricism and portraits of everyday life, its struggles and little victories, allows audiences to instantly connect with the songs, his words reflecting shared emotions and experiences with a similar clarity of detail as a magnified mirror. 

A master songwriter, vocalist and musician, the potent combination of humanity, otherworldliness and universality across his work makes Richard Dawson truly in a class of his own. He may not be a wizard in the traditional sense, harboring a wand and casting spells, but it is undeniable that there’s a magic in the music he creates. Whether that’s in his solo output or  Bulbils (the project he shares with his partner Sally Pilkington) or in Henki, the tremendous album Dawson made with Circle, Dawson, in the most unassuming way, is able to have his audiences utterly enraptured within seconds. That’s evident in both his music and in conversation. An affable and interested person, it was endlessly entertaining listening to Dawson speak about researching lighting and revisiting tv schedules from the 1990s as we discussed all the elements that brought End of the Middle into being. | z hedderman

Aquarium Drunkard: The last couple of times I’ve seen your live shows, it’s just you and your guitar and yet the songs have always been just as sweeping and textured as the recordings. Did your recent solo tours influence End of The Middle’s much sparser, more intimate sound?

Richard Dawson: I think it was more because that was what the stories needed. I decided quite early on that it would have this quite stripped-back feel because I wanted it to be really bare and for the melodies and the lyrics to be doing all of the work. But it’s always there in the back of your mind, you think that it would be a lot easier to do it alone. When we did The Ruby Cord tour, there were five people in the band and it’s complicated to do, but it’s not so complicated, but I think it’s just about what the music needed. Once I decided it was going to be this very domestic thing and that each person in a song comes to some kind of realization, or some sort of rebirth or something like that, I thought it would suit it to be very bare and maybe even a bit weak sounding. I’ve been saying in interviews recently that I wanted it to be like a goat that’s just been born and it’s staggering around all covered in this sticky stuff… 



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


AD: Finding its feet and making its way in life. 

Richard Dawson: Exactly! 

AD: At what point did you make that decision to have it sound like that and how long did it take to make the album? 

Richard Dawson: Quite early on, actually. Once I had the idea that it would be like a picture inside a typical English family house, then how it sounded came quite early, even before the specifics of the songs. You set these parameters and it’s a useful scaffolding and then you start to hang stuff on that. That was one of the key things. 

In terms of how long it took to make, I don’t know. I was thinking about it for a long time, maybe even before The Ruby Cord came out. But in terms of the actual writing and recording, there were songs that were kind of half-forming and stuff like that, so maybe over the course of a year the songs were forming. It took me a long time to write the words for this album. It was the best part of a year, I wasn’t in the best headspace so my concentration was really bad. I was just moving so slowly through the lyrics. I do all the lyrics at once and when I’ve got all of the music ready then I approach it. That’s just how it works for me but it was pretty slow this time. I guess, in total, a couple of years all told. 

AD: Was there one song in particular that was more difficult lyrically to write? 

Richard Dawson: They were all a bit challenging for different reasons. I think some of the easier ones would be, just by virtue of being so short, like “Bolt”, for example. That has its own challenge because you don’t have a lot of room to play with but you know, at the very least, you get through it fast. Whereas, “Knot” was a really hard one because it was quite draining to do. It’s so heavy. Then, something like “Removals Van” was hard in a totally different way. It was technically hard, that one, because the structure is quite complicated. I feel really proud of that one because it was so hard to do. I don’t know if that’s reflected in the final song or not but it’s a different kind of hard. 

And then the last song, “More Than Real” was quite hard for other reasons, mainly because I had to wrestle the verses from Sally [Pilkington]! She’d had it kick around for so long and I just would keep hearing this melody and was like, ‘Oh my God, that’s completely amazing, this would go well with this chorus I’ve got here’. I had to convince her for months and months and months and eventually she bargained and said ‘Well, you can have it as long as I sing on it’. But it made real sense actually for the album and the song. That was really hard; to write with somebody else’s melody because it was important to keep it, it’s very specific in how it lands, and trying to write in somebody else’s shape was impossible. It’s not a long song but it just took forever to find the right words for it. 

AD: That’s really interesting. You mentioned a theme of English families and in the accompanying press materials for the album you spoke of breaking certain cycles and how we progress and try to avoid repeating the same mistakes. Earlier, you said something about how the people within these songs are coming to certain realizations. In writing these songs, I have to imagine that you can subconsciously unlock experiences and emotions and when you revisit them, you can be surprised by what you’ve written and the lyrics might enlighten something along the way. Did you have moments like that with End of The Middle?

Richard Dawson: Perhaps. I think I always have it in my mind that I’m not writing about myself. But it’s quite blurry because I’m drawing from things of my own life or friends or family and then some imagination or newspaper articles or something like that. So I always had, or maybe it’s like I’m in denial or something, but I think it sort of struck me with this song “Knot”; it wasn’t about anything that’s going on for me but when I was writing it, I was really troubled by something, which I won’t go into, but it was weighing on me. The topic of the song is completely different but the feel of it and the spirit of where I was at just goes into it. It’s the same for the whole album, really. It has such a particular feeling of how I was feeling over the two years of making it. Not the specifics of the stories, they weren’t something, in the most part, that were troubling me, but I can hear other things in it and am like, ‘Oh my God, that’s so funny,’ or whatever, but in terms of revelations or something like that, I don’t know. I learned nothing! 

AD:  I remember seeing you in 2022 and you played “Polytunnel”. It was such a gorgeous performance and I found it really moving. I love the music video for the song with all the different people involved in the allotment. When did you get into gardening? 

Richard Dawson: Well this is a bit like when I did interviews around 2020 and talked about the song “Jogging”. I think it was a bit of a devastating blow for a lot of joggers to realize that I hated jogging. My dad is an athletics coach and my brother is an athlete but I don’t like it. People were really upset by that and maybe it’s a little bit the same with the allotment, well it’s not quite the same, but we got an allotment in this village where we live now, maybe two years ago, and I had this vision of myself being like perfectly in tune with nature and tending to the plants and all of this. Sally, my partner, really likes it but I kind of have realized that I really don’t like to do it. I really love it as a thing that people do, but personally I find it very stressful. I can’t see well enough, I’m visually impaired, and detail is the thing that goes so I was going up there just injuring myself, getting struck with things and pulling plants that I shouldn’t and coming back covered in scratches and falling down little holes. I just had to admit eventually that I really don’t like this. It’s terrible! I hate that some people will read this and be disappointed but that is the truth.

AD: I’d rather you tell me the truth than lie about loving when a crop of cucumbers comes up. 

Richard Dawson: Oh it’s magic! There’s no feeling like it when you’ve raised them up from seed. I love the whole process when you can’t see the little seeds and you don’t know what you’re doing and you’re pressing them in and it’s like I feel like I’m sort of at one with nature and then they grow and you see them pop-out and it’s like I did that! Yeah, no! But, jokes aside, I do love those things for other people but I just can’t do that. 

It’s almost like, have you ever had this depression-feeling around having a pet, maybe? I’ve had it with hamsters in the past when maybe I didn’t look after them well enough, or I even have it with my cat sometimes where I’m like ‘What is this all about?’ Maybe I have it a little bit with plants like when my plants get sick, it makes me feel so terrible. There’s something horrific about life, so maybe I don’t need to introduce any more of that into my own life but I really love gardeners and gardening as a thing. 

AD: You were saying that your lyrics aren’t necessarily autobiographical but you draw inspiration from things that have happened to you and those close to you. Am I correct in saying that a bolt of lightning did hit your house when you were a child and that provided a foundation for the album’s opening song “Bolt”? 

Richard Dawson: That’s true, yeah! I don’t remember exactly how old I was, probably about 10 or 11. We were all in different rooms and suddenly–it wasn’t even stormy outside which made it really weird, it wasn’t like we’re in the middle of a thunderstorm–everyone independently was blinded by this flash! My mam screamed and my dad had been on his phone fax machine because he had a little office in the house after he had been made redundant from his previous job and was selling packages from the house. About 10 seconds after the bolt, the smoke alarms went off and then we tracked it and it was the phone that had turned brown and burned. I remember looking it up around that time and seeing that something like 10 people a year were killed on the phone by lightning. It doesn’t happen so much now, but he basically was a matter of seconds away from getting fried because you get the bolt straight into you but you also get the mains electricity, so you don’t stand a chance.

What struck me as strange about it, was that over the years I would sometimes bring it up at family gatherings and always the conversation would move away from it really quickly. To me, I’d be like ‘This is absolutely amazing!’ but I’d mention it and people would go, ‘Oh yeah, yeah anyway, did you remember when Sheila brought such and such’ and I would be looking like ‘What? Aren’t we going to talk about it…? We’ve got a good hour of material here!’.  When I was making the album, I remembered about this and also how strange it was that we hadn’t talked about it. We had to move off the topic as quickly as possible. I wonder if it’s because it’s so mysterious. I ended up researching it a lot and was wondering how and why did we all see this blinding flash? How was that possible? We were in different rooms all over the house. I found out that when lightning hits a house it spreads and it goes through the beams and into the wiring and into the pipes and it will travel basically the easiest route possible, so that’s the most conductive materials, and it will even leap across rooms to get to the most conductive material. That’s why we all saw it; because some lightning went across the rooms that we were in and then it goes to ground and it’s gone.

I think the weirdest thing is just that we all just got on with our day, as I remember. I don’t think the house was damaged apart from the phone fax machine. And now, the fact that whenever it was brought up, people would move the conversation off to something inane within 15-20 seconds. I tried it again a few months ago and the same thing happened with my family. They were like, ‘Oh yeah, yeah. It was amazing, anyhow do you remember when Mary broke her ankle on the rollercoaster that time?’! 

AD: Well, I’m glad you have it immortalized in the song.

Richard Dawson: Yeah, well it seemed like a good metaphor. I was already underway with the album and I think it was one of the last things I wrote, and it was like ‘Oh hang, this thing that happened’, and it was kind of like what I was doing with the songs, like putting a big giant shining torch into a doll’s house, examining every little nook and cranny. 

AD: Something I love about your songs is how detailed you make the stories in a short space of time. The imagination in your songs, I find, is so vivid and well crafted and I become so emotionally invested in the stories and the characters. For this album you cited Yasujirō Ozu and his films Tokyo Story and Late Spring as influences. I know that you got your first guitar when you were about 12 or 13, but before you started writing songs, were you a child that wrote stories or made-up plays? 

Richard Dawson: I wrote stories when I was a kid, yeah.When I got my guitar I just wanted to make songs, but they weren’t very imaginative. Maybe they were nonsensical. I sort of feel like my imagination isn’t as supple as I would like it to be. It feels like harder work than it should be. I’m quite lucky that I get to meet some really creative people through doing music, some novelists and stand-ups and their minds are so fast. They’re so smart and I feel like I can’t keep up. I don’t think I’m particularly imaginative or smart or anything like that. I’m not trying to be falsely modest here, but I know that my skills are more based on deciding and then doing it until it’s good enough. It’s creative for sure, I have that very strongly, but in terms of imagination, I’m not sure. It’s more like you just take a lot of paths and then you end up walking back to where it started mainly until you finally hit on the right one. 

AD: Along with Ozu, what other filmmakers and writers have been hugely influential on how you develop the scenes and characters in your songs? 

Richard Dawson: In terms of this album, it’s a really good question, I don’t know how directly they would have influenced this album, but certainly the last album, The Ruby Cord, Thomas Pynchon was a big one just in terms of taking a maximalist approach which I just think is completely amazing. I really love Michel Faber, he wrote The Crimson Patel and the White and The Book of Strange New Things. Again, it’s not an influence on this album in particular, but it’s very inspiring. I tend to take care to try and avoid too many songwriters, or maybe just have seasons where I would listen to certain things, because I don’t want to get too influenced. However, one person I took a lot of inspiration from for this album was Michael Hurley, less like his songs but more how he went about recording them in the style of playing in a very easy sounding style and very roomy recordings. That was a big part of it. 

Then yeah, lots of films! Lots of different filmmakers; Apichatpong Weerasethakul who made Tropical Malady and Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives, it’s beautiful. Tropical Malady is the one, as far as I’m concerned, that might be my top film of all time. I’m trying to get out of favorites and that kind of thing but it’s really good. I’m trying to think who else in terms of writers, Iris Murdoch is one, for sure. 

AD: Nice! Have you enjoyed any recent films? 

Richard Dawson: Just last night we watched The Order with Jude Law. It’s really good. I feel like he’s getting better. He’s got an absolutely tremendous mustache in this film, it’s got a really nice 70s feel. It reminded me of, now it’s not as good as this film, but it reminded me of The Red Circle, a Jean-Pierre Melville crime film. That’s a real beauty and it’s so bleak. It’s a grimy, gritty looking but very precise work; Le Cercle Rouge, it’s really good. We also watched Kelly Reichardt’s film Showing Up last night. It’s good, like not much happens in it, it’s some artists going about their lives, trying to look after a pigeon, making some sculptures. 

The biggest film that has, I do apologize, I’m rabbiting, but you’ve got me going on films! It was either on the day or the day after Trump’s inauguration, I was feeling, like so many people, just completely bewildered and by Elon Musk’s behavior as well. Oh my God, this is madness. The tactics that they use to normalize it, it’s distressing to see it work. For years, I’d wanted to watch this Kurosawa film called Red Beard, which is the last collaboration between him and Toshiro Mifune before they had a falling out. I’d read that it was a very humanist film about a country doctor. Maybe it was some quote I’d seen where someone said that it’s one of the most humanistic films, so I just thought now’s the time and watched it. It’s very long and slow. Honestly, it was like balm for my soul. It was such a huge endeavor to make the film, as well, but it was such a beacon of what I needed at that moment. It really, really helped. 

AD: Nice, I must watch that soon. Your song, ‘The Hermit’ has become a go-to for me when I go to read my book on weekend mornings because it carves out a nice 40 minute period for me to just completely relax. In terms of your songwriting, general recording approaches or leaning more into improvisation, did that song have an impact on your creative process? 

Richard Dawson: Maybe it’s too soon to tell. It was definitely a big one for me because it was technically really hard, but it was also quite natural at the same time once it started ballooning, it was like, ‘What on earth is this? Why is it doing this?’ It just sort of did its own thing. Then, when you are faced with this huge lump of raw material, it was a case of figuring out what could this possibly be? It sort of sets you thinking like, ‘OK, well, it’s going to be something’. It wasn’t going to be 40 minutes, even before we took it in the studio it was going to have four or five minutes at the start and be much briefer at the end but everything just got stretched. I really wanted to lean into it and the improvised nature of it. 

As to your question, I think probably at points, I mean I come from more of an experimental music background in terms of my listening so it didn’t really feel like a big deal. In fact, usually I’m thinking that what I’m doing is very straight. And I wonder, why is that? It’s not that I wouldn’t listen to this. Well, I would sometimes. It’s funny to be making songs. I mean, I really believe in what I make, but sometimes you do think, ‘Why am I not making more music like the records I would play on repeat for years?’. It’s a funny thing. I don’t want to, I have no desire to. I much prefer to listen to other people do it. 

I suppose you just follow where the song wants to go, really. Maybe the things that the songs teach me are to just trust it or be like ‘Oh, we can do that’. Usually, you can just go wherever and it doesn’t matter. What’s the worst that’s going to happen? Somebody might not respond to it. You know, sometimes it’s just not going to work for someone. If it works for me and if it works for the song, most importantly, then that’s what I follow. I’m not a new age person at all, I’m pretty cynical in some ways, I hope not too many ways, so it’s kind of painful for me to describe a song as spiritual, but, it feels like when they appear, they’re like spirits or something like this. They’re a big hunk of raw material, spirit material, and then you just have to be faithful to it as best as you can until you think it’s revealed whatever was inside the big trunk that landed in the living room. 

AD: That’s lovely. Similarly with Bulbils, between March and October 2020, you released 50 albums on Bandcamp. That must have been a really fun way of just sitting down and almost having a free association process of making music and engaging with it for the fun of it. 

Richard Dawson: Yeah, it was really nice and made this structure for our time. I think as well, it was a nice change for me. I think I started working on The Ruby Cord at that time so I had this very structured, complicated work but then doing Bulbils was the opposite, I mean it was sketched in a way, but it was just so nice to do and I got to make a funny album cover every day or two and choose a new font. It kept me occupied. Hopefully the music was useful in the way that you can put it on when you make a meal or have a bath or whatever. It was nice just aiming low because I suppose when I’m making an album, even though I don’t necessarily think it will have a big effect, I want to make the best album that I can. It’s going to be the best singer-songwriter album of the first third of the year 2025, surely?! 

AD: Of course, no one else should even bother releasing anything! Going back to End of The Middle, I loved how TV plays such a big part in the set dressing of songs. Thinking about the role TV can play in some people’s lives and how integral it is to their routines and even just for providing company. They have their own rhythms of spending the afternoon with Loose Women or there’s a show like A Place In The Sun which might be how people get to see other parts of the world. How intentional was having the television as a focal point to so many of these songs? 

Richard Dawson: It was a big thing. The last album was sort of concerned with all these virtual worlds and this struggle to connect. I think with this one, because it’s mainly set in the ‘90s, I was thinking back to how a lot of families functioned and the TV set was like a member of the family. It’s doing most of the talking. I really like your question and it’s not necessarily a negative thing of this thing being company for people, I think it’s really amazing. And, the Loose Women is a fantastic example because you totally feel what that is. They’re so good on that show and it also gives this feeling that you’re just with the girls having a coffee. 

I’ve enjoyed that stuff, but I’ve also felt that horror of feeling like I’m trapped in the house and the cycle of TV is so meaningless. I felt that meaninglessness really strongly with some of the Noel Edmonds programs, particularly, even though I think he’s very talented. I’m not looking to slate anyone, but Deal or No Deal, I was like, ‘Wow, this is scary’. The contestants may have a big amount of money in the box and they spend an hour whittling it down and then they can decide just to swap it at the end. We’re watching this going like ‘What? This means something’, I don’t understand what it is. It’s really surreal. There’s so much surreality on the TV, but somehow it being on the screen normalizes it. 

So, yeah, I just thought about how big a role it played in my upbringing. That’s surely the same for most people, too. I thought for the tv to not be there would have been weird. 

AD: Absolutely. You mentioned how the ‘90s provided a timeframe for the album, “The Question”, with the ghostly train station master, reminded me of the mockumentary Ghostwatch with Michael Parkinson. I watched that for the first time last Halloween and was terrified. Have you seen it? 

Richard Dawson: Oh my God, that one. Yeah, I know the one you mean! I will never forget it. I was so relieved even to read, actually, it came up when I was researching the album, not because of the ghost song, but I spent probably the best part of maybe four days trying to find an instance where Gladiators was on at the same time as Noel’s House Party and it just wasn’t, apart from finally one day where there was a 20 minute crossover. I did all that research just so I can put it in a song. It was like, ‘Oh God, thank you so much!’, just this freak occurrence of programming, but I knew I wanted those two to be the ones. It was from looking through all of these old TV schedules, because they’re all archived, I saw this thing and I remembered clicking on it and remembering the bit towards the end with the voice. It’s so scary. I was really relieved to read that was all a hoax. 

AD: I mentioned earlier about how I get invested in the characters and stories in your songs, something I think about regularly is the last line of “Two Halves” where a kid who has lost the football match is asked by their dad if they want a Chinese or fish and chips takeaway for dinner. Which one do you think they chose? And for you personally, what is your go-to order from the Chinese and the chipper? 

Richard Dawson: Now we’re getting to the big questions! Which do I think he went for? Well, I know what I picture it as what they went for. I always remember getting fish chips with my dad and like and I would carry it, I’d sit it in my lap in the car and it was always just really warm. I always picture that, but it could be either. I think fish and chips. 

But Chinese wise, that would be my order now. We’ve got a great Chinese restaurant nearby, it’s one village away, and they do a totally amazing salt and pepper chicken. I like to get that and a Peking pork, which is like the bright red balls and sauce. Those two together with rice and a can of Coca Cola.

AD: Excellent order, excellent order. Finally, do you think Newcastle can beat Liverpool in the Carabao Cup final next month? 

Richard Dawson: That’s a very loaded question! I have no idea, how could I know? I hope they do, I hope they do. I think it’s got a different feeling about the final two years ago, we’re a bit more unpredictable, maybe, but I think we’ve got a bit more about us. It’ll be good, that one. I think it could go either way. Yeah, I really hope Newcastle do win it, we need it. It would be special to get it now before the Saudi dollars really kick in in a big way. It would mean a lot more now than in five years time. 

AD: Do you have a favorite player in the Newcastle squad at the moment? 

Richard Dawson: Yeah, I love Joelinton. I love what he does. I love his story as well of going from really having as rough a time as it gets and then to come and do what he’s done, it’s really fantastic. He’s brilliant!

 

 
 Posted on March 13, 2025March 13, 2025Richard Dawson The AD Interview
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });