# The Beach Boys at Big Sur Folk Festival (1970)

_2026-05-27_ · by Justin Gage · `feature`
**Tags:** The Beach Boys, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2026/05/27/the-beach-boys-at-big-sur-folk-festival-1970/)

## Links
- YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a9tLnDRQW40

## Body

As captured by photographer Roger Steffens (The Family Acid), the Beach Boys certainly looked the part as they took the stage for the first of their afternoon/evening sets, launching into “Wouldn’t It Be Nice”. Sans Dennis Wilson who was off filming Monte Hellman’s cult road movie Two-Lane Blacktop, the lavishly colorful stage backdrop dawned a massive quilted tapestry featuring designs of red and yellow suns, vibrant swirls and imagery of esoteric, new age symbolism. The seventh annual Big Sur Folk Festival had relocated to Monterey in 1970, away from the more natural and scenic “swimming pool near the ocean” confines as seen in the documentary film the previous year. The band’s rehabilitation image campaign was in full swing by the fall of ’70, with savvy advertising campaigns delivering radio spots and print adverts letting you know that it was now safe to listen to the Beach Boys. 

In fact, the venue itself could be seen as a prophetic rehabilitation—having been the site of 1967’s massively influential Monterey Pop Festival—a flower-laced gathering of the tribes and an attempt to intellectualize the cultural zeitgeist and momentum of pop music in the same vein as the annual Monterey Jazz Festival. The Beach Boys had quietly dropped out of that magnified Monterey Pop showcase, with swirling rumors ranging from the logistical complications over Carl Wilson’s draft status to—the lamest yet most probable of all—the band simply feeling passé alongside the nexus of hip psychedelic bands from San Francisco. Prior to that decision (and regardless of level of activity), Brian Wilson had been on the festival’s board of directors alongside not only the LA milieu in the confines of their Sunset Boulevard production office, but the likes of Paul McCartney and Andrew Loog Oldham. 

Exploring that theory briefly: for every symbolic moment like Hendrix igniting his guitar, the American introduction to Ravi Shankar or the profile-raising of a San Francisco upstart like Joplin, the festival was also augmented with unfashionably lite acts such as The Association. With John Phillips and producer Lou Adler the primary catalysts for the operation, The Mamas & the Papas was the performance that closed the curtain, seen as an anticlimactic finale to many of the bohemia-minded involved. California’s own native sons would have been received just fine; whether or not it would have endeared or raised their rock hierarchy status to the likes of a Ralph J. Gleason or the arbiters of the burgeoning underground press (anyone with any loose journalistic credentials at all was admitted) is another hypothetical. 

The pastoral Wild Honey gem “County Air” and a cappella “There Hearts Were Full of Spring” are perfect for the occasion, and besides one obligatory “California Girls”, the set wields only material from Pet Sounds onward. Augmenting the band is drummer Mike Kowalski in place of Dennis and Daryl Dragon on keyboards/bass. The band’s more lackadaisical attitude also lends itself some lighthearted interactions of stage banter: following a strong vocal rendition of “Tears in the Morning”, Bruce Johnston claims that they’re saving some of the surf songs for the evening set later, “for all the ex-surfers”. After pulling out “Vegetables”, the band shouts out that it was a Brian and Van Dyke Parks songwriting effort and comments that those were some weird sessions, a lead-in to addressing Brian’s absence by claiming it’s a sore throat. Joining a lineup with the likes of Joan Baez, Country Joe and Mimi Fariña, it was actually Van Dyke (not only from the days as SMiLE co-lyricist but responsible for band just signing to Warner/Reprise amidst plenty of other label rejections) who secured the band’s appearance.

It comes as little surprise that “Good Vibrations” concludes the diffuse set. Before going on to share a Fillmore East gig with the Grateful Dead and Brian rejoining the stage for an infamous local gig at the Whiskey a Go Go a month later (their first hometown concert since the Hollywood Bowl in ’66), it all started up the Pacific Coast Highway. After just one local radio interview on KPFK, a disc jockey named Jack Rieley quickly integrated himself into the band’s inner circle, taking over management/publicity duties before getting into co-writing songs himself. Like many keen listeners, particularly in Europe, Rieley had been taken by the majestic brilliance of Sunflower despite it being yet another sales disaster. Of course, Rieley’s grandiose strategy—which also anointed Carl as de facto bandleader—was mostly an exercise in common sense. Yet it’s one of many uncanny examples of the band, with all of the financial resources and music industry’s far-reaching cache at their fingertips, gravitating toward an unlikely and somewhat spontaneous character. 

For a downward trajectory that had spiraled in terms of both album sales and any sort of loose embrace by impressionable youth or the counterculture at large (“Fading Rock Group Revival” was an original working album title for Sunflower), it was beyond overdue to jettison the outdated matching striped shirts and formulaic sets of golden oldies. Prior to the conscious shift in lyrical themes such as social and ecological causes like water pollution on Surf’s Up, the aesthetic overhaul needed to first happen on the road. The whole appearance was an unmitigated success, the concert being lauded by the perennially skeptical Jann Wenner in a glowing Rolling Stone article at the time. “The group that went right to the genesis of California music”, in his own words. When A&M released their live record Celebration the following year, only “Wouldn’t It Be Nice” made the release, while the likes of Rondstadt, Kristofferson and Baez all got two tracks a piece. That exhaustive red tape over the recordings has still never been unraveled.

Despite all the vault-emptying archival box releases out of the Beach Boys camp over the last decade (recently extending to the late seventies Love You era), the Big Sur appearance still remains only in bootleg form, with a handful of tracks being extremely gnarly soundboard recordings to complete the set. The trajectory was also a blueprint to another notorious concert: a New York shindig at Carnegie Hall, finally officially released on 2022’s box covering the Holland and Carl and the Passions era. At this point, there’s only so much left in the archives, and pivotal live shows are rarely on the agenda as a benchmark of all of the band’s unraveling and endless lore. But with Big Sur, it’s more than just an imprinted touchstone in an important bridgegap era of the band. That extends to the performance itself—what we have cobbled together—as much as the accompanying imagery and footnote in the numerous written histories. | m neeley

 

 
 Posted on May 27, 2026May 27, 2026The Beach Boys
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });