# Transmissions :: Jens Lekman

**Transmissions — Jens Lekman** · _2025-09-17_ · by Jason Woodbury · `podcast`
**Tags:** Jens Lekman, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/09/17/transmissions-jens-lekman/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://jenslekman.bandcamp.com/album/songs-for-other-people-s-weddings

## Body

This week on the show, Jason P. Woodbury speaks with Swedish songwriter Jens Lekman. Woodbury has been listening to Jens for just about 20 years—introduced by the 2005 compilation, Oh You’re So Silent Jens. Though the comp features songs ingeniously constructed using samples, it was Lekman’s voice that made Woodbury such a fan. Not just his deep, sonorous croon; we mean “voice” in the writing sense: Lekman has a signature ability to sound funny and sad at the same time, or wounded yet somehow simultaneously hopeful. 

Transmissions :: Jens Lekman

Jens has a new album out now called ⁠Songs for Other People’s Weddings⁠, and it arrives complete with a novel of the same name co-written by David Levithan, who you may know from works like Boy Meets Boy, Wide Awake, Nick and Norah’s Infinite Playlist, The Lover’s Dictionary, and others.  Taken together, the novel and the record represent a little bit of reality, and a little bit of fiction.

Lekman really has worked as a wedding singer for most of his career—his first album, 2004’s When I Said I Wanted to Be Your Dog even features a song called “If You Ever Need a Stranger (To Sing at Your Wedding).” But Songs For Other People’s Weddings is not about Lekman’s life per se—it’s about love and loss, heartbreak and hope, and ultimately, about the way music plays us through our lives. 

We’re so pleased to have Jens join me for this conversation. We discuss the new album, when weddings indicate to him a sense of if a couple is going to make it or not, his thoughtful blog, and what it was like to re-record some of his classics albums after sample clearances were unable to be obtained. Join in for this conversation about love, music, and art on Transmissions.



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Aquarium Drunkard: I have really been enjoying my time with Songs for Other People’s Weddings. Earlier this month you did some performances, a book/music tour with David Leviathan. What was that experience like? How was the rollout of this project for you?

Jens Lekman: It was very different. I went to bed at 10:00 PM every night. I had maybe two beers on the entire tour. Got up at 6:00 AM and took a walk. It was very different from a normal tour, I would say.

AD: Were the two of you traveling together?

Jens Lekman: Yes.

AD: Oh, that’s awesome. You’ve got this collaborative project where he wrote a novel, you wrote an album. The two intersect at certain points, diverge slightly, but mostly it’s one project. Were you guys speaking a lot during this progres? Was there a lot of back and forth? Were there phone calls? Were you Zooming? What was the working relationship like?

Jens Lekman: Yeah, we talked a lot. I think in the beginning it was mostly just structure, the shape of the collaboration. He came up with the idea of me writing songs for fictional couples, and then he would write chapters backwards from that. I mostly had questions [like] “How similar is this character to me, myself?” And later on, I think the questions became more about love and relationships and because at some point I started asking him, I started reacting to certain parts of the story. I said, “I don’t recognize this…is this actually how someone reacts in a relationship?” And that led us to quite a lot of conversations about how we viewed love and relationships.

AD: You have to be pretty comfortable with the person to sort of get into that territory. When did you first meet David? How far back do you guys go?

Jens Lekman: David wrote to me in 2005, I think. He’d been listening to my first album while he was writing a book at the time. He sent me his first book and I really enjoyed that. We just kept in touch for a few years and we didn’t meet until, I think it was 2011, when I was playing in New York and he had just released A Lover’s Dictionary. And then when I got that one, which was the first non-young adult fiction that I’d read of him, I really took a liking to that book. We kept in touch about random things over the years, but it wasn’t until the pandemic that we started talking about doing this project. We didn’t really know each other before that. I think David talks about it as the mutual admiration club and I think that’s what it was for the first 15 years.

AD: Yeah, I mean that’s pretty cool to have something like that. You probably have often heard from people who are listening to your record who want to tell you about their experiences doing so, but I don’t know, to have somebody talk about listening to your music while writing, while creating themselves, is a pretty interesting thing. I know so many writers who are like, “I can’t listen to things with words when I’m writing.” I’m pretty similar…I would say when I’m writing, I usually need to have something without a narrative. But listening to this new record, having listened to your records, going as far back as 2005 myself, I’ve always thought that you’re a very storytelling-forward artist, so it makes a lot of sense. I feel like this collaboration doesn’t really come out of nowhere. It feels pretty inevitable and organic at the same time.

The record is heartbreaking. It’s funny, it’s smart. It’s a really cool situation that you’ve got going on here. When people hear the term “rock opera,” I’m sure that that freaks them out cause they’re like, wait, what am I getting into? Is this going to sound like King Crimson or something? It doesn’t, but there is a ton of stylistic ground explored on the record. You’ve got pop music, you’ve got some folk songs. Pretty much everything that people have ever heard you do, but it feels like it’s all of a piece and maybe the start of a new chapter for you in a creative sense. I’m curious about that term: rock opera. Is that a term that you yourself feel comfortable with?

Jens Lekman: Not necessarily. I think that I have this little voice in my head that sometimes pops up and comes up with really bad ideas, or bad ideas that are so bad that they are fun. And this little voice popped up in my head and was like, why don’t you make a rock opera? I thought, that’s a terrible idea. I hate rock operas. But usually that voice leads me the right way and just by leading me to where things are different and fun and out of the ordinary. And it led me to exploring what it was I was thinking of with the word rock opera, because I’m not thinking about Is King Crimson, did they actually do rock operas?

AD: No, I feel like kind of an asshole. I don’t think that really describes King Crimson. I should have said, well, I guess maybe Genesis. I was thinking of The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway, which is a record I love, but I think that counts as a rock opera. I don’t know if King Crimson actually has any rock operas, but a lot of that progressive ‘70s rock type stuff….

Jens Lekman: That led me to, especially to two records, one being Frank Sinatra’s Watertown, which is just a conceptual narrative album. I didn’t even know that it was—it was only quite recently that I realized there was a story on that record. And the other one, surprisingly, being A Grand Don’t Come for Free by The Streets. If you remember that record, it was a narrative concept album, but it has a really interesting and quite complex story in it if you actually sit down with the lyrics to that record. So I think those two records were my inspiration and they don’t really sound like rock operas at all.  I didn’t want this record to feel like theatrical. I wanted it to be a bunch of songs that you can listen to without understanding the whole narrative. I wanted them to be pop songs and good songs in themselves.

AD: You accomplished that for sure in a way that is similar to those other two albums you mentioned, where it’s not necessarily the overarching story that people think of first, they think of the songs, the individual moments on the record. But as far as this goes, having read through parts of the book listened to the record, I can see there are characters, there are people speaking, there is a continuity, there is a narrative shape, all of that stuff. But yeah, I don’t think you have to, you could listen to it. You listen to regular music too and just be like, oh, I love this song because it sounds cool. You brought up Watertown. I love that record. I think, I don’t know if you’re a Bruce Springsteen fan at all. 

Jens Lekman: Yeah. 

AD: I’m a huge Springsteen fan. For a long time I would get annoyed at non Springsteen people who were like, oh, Nebraska‘s cool. I like Nebraska, but not the rest of it. I kind of feel like I’m that way about Frank Sinatra, where I’m like, I love Watertown. It’s the Nebraska of the Frank Sinatra catalog, because it’s really the only one that sounds like that. It’s a really beautiful record, but sort of a seventies pop, kind of a singer songwriter thing, but just very different. And then, yeah, like you said, there’s a narrative to it. So I’m just curious, are you in general a Sinatra fan? Is he somebody you enjoy his work more broadly?

Jens Lekman: No, not at all. I think that’s one of, I mean, the whole idea, the more popular idea of Frank Sinatra, like the casino Sinatra or the jazzy Sinatra, it’s not my cup of tea. I’m sure he is great, but it’s not my thing. No. What I like about that record is that he’s playing a character and that character is so unlike him in a way. It’s sort of seeing an old action hero performing in a very quiet drama or something, and if I would’ve imagined a narrative concept album for Sinatra, it probably would’ve been about a jewel thief or some sort of very over the top drama. But to actually place him within this story about a very common person in a small town being abandoned by his wife, it’s quite beautiful. It’s a nice contrast.

AD: Yeah, I agree. I was thinking about other sort of big conceptual albums in relation to this one, and maybe it’s just recency bias, but I have been on for a couple years now, a pretty massive Prefab Sprout kick, and they’ve got this record called Jordan: The Comeback. Do you know that record?

Jens Lekman: I love it. Yeah.

AD: I think it’s a concept album, but I don’t always know what’s going on on that record. But I keep coming back to that one because, similar to this record, you’ve got different people speaking and there’s parts where you’re hearing sort of dialogue basically through the music. And I think of as a songwriter, there must be a little bit of a challenge that you are facing when you’re trying to fit the conventions of a song and make sure that the words flow within the context of the music, but also in some cases on this record, you’re sort of detailing conversational elements and you’ve got other singers who help bring in some other voices and stuff like that. But I was just curious, I mean, was that a little bit of a challenge? Did that take some, let’s say you’ve written story songs in the past. Did you realize, okay, when you’re doing it like this, there’s more to the process than in the past where maybe you could gloss over something or make it more streamlined? I’m just curious what that process was like on the writing side of it.

Jens Lekman: Yes. I have a lot of respect for editors these days. I mean, writing a song like “Wedding in Leipzig” for example…in the beginning, I think that song was twice as long. I had to edit it down, and it was the same thing for the album, actually. There was a point when I realized maybe I don’t need to say all these things. That’s the beauty of music that you can actually convey them through music itself. I could easily make a deluxe version of this album with 40 songs or something. I wrote so many songs to sort of capture all the bits of David’s book, especially that I, in the end, felt like this album needs to take a slightly different route and just be told through music as much as through the words.

AD: Yeah, again, recency bias probably kicking in, but not that long ago, I watched the Billy Joel documentary on HBO. I’m not the world’s biggest Billy Joel fan, but I do always think of that song “Scenes from an Italian Restaurant,” and there’s a long solo section in it where the saxophone comes in, and I’ve always thought of that part of the song as representing all the years going by in these two characters’ lives because they’re meeting up after a long time. And so I think that’s cool what you’re saying about how sometimes the music ends up, it does some narrative work too, or it helps, it explains something without having to say it. I really do think that at the end of the day, this book and this album end up being about music as much as weddings or anything else. You know what I mean? It’s about your relationship with music and people’s relationship with music. And so it’s a beautiful reminder that yeah, sometimes you don’t have to say anything. The music sort of says it for you.

Jens Lekman: What was the name of that Billy Joel song?

AD: Oh, “Scenes From An Italian Restaurant.” 

Jens Lekman: Wow. I got to check that out. I haven’t heard it.

AD: Well, yes, it’s pretty good. It’s a pretty good song.

Jens Lekman: I love that you just started referencing as if you assumed that I’d heard it but I’ll definitely check that out after this. But yes, I mean, I’ve sat down sometimes and tried to write just text without music, like short stories or movie scripts or ideas for stories, and I always get to a point where I feel like, why would I write this? It should be a string section. And yeah, I think that’s the reason why I don’t think that I’ll ever write a book myself, and that’s part of the reason why I turned to David with this project.

AD: I still imagine you could write a good book. I’ll reference it a little bit later in the interview, but you keep a very cool blog on your website, and I think you have quite a way with the written word as well. But on the topic of music, so famously your 2004 debut, or at least full-length debut here in the States features a song called “If You Ever Need a Stranger to Sing At Your Wedding.” I think I’ve sometimes heard songwriters refer to how they’ll write a song and then they will feel as if the song is either telling the future in some sense or explaining some part of them that they didn’t know consciously they were exploring. But then upon sort of hearing the song realized, oh, wow. So I’m just curious how soon after releasing that record in 2004, was it that people started asking you to sing at their wedding? Was it pretty quick?

Jens Lekman:  Yeah, it was right away. It took a while before it started picking up. But yeah, right away people started asking about it. I think I did my first wedding two weeks after that record came out.

AD: Wow.

Jens Lekman: I think the reason why I wrote that song was because I played my music for a friend of mine, and he didn’t like it. He said, “Ugh, it sounds like cheesy wedding music.” So I think I sort of started writing… I wrote that song a bit tongue in cheek as a reaction to that comment from my friend. I think around that time, music was still very guitar based and very rock-based. I liked a lot of soft music. I liked a lot of cheesy music.

AD: A lot of songs could be played at a wedding. I remember being at a wedding once and they played a Sufjan Stevens song, “Chicago,” which is really beautiful. But right as everybody was walking down the aisle, the lyric was, “I’ve made a lot of mistakes. I’ve made a lot of mistakes.” And I kept finding myself thinking, I think I would be too self-conscious to play this song at my wedding. But in a wedding, a cheesy song, your heart might be opened up to the cheesiness. You know what I mean? In a way that’s very different than a normal situation. And so, I like when those moments happen where something that might seem cheesy or too earnest or on the nose begins to not feel that way at all, instead feel profound or even transcendent at times.

I’ve DJ’d a few weddings and they are very special occasions, but you talked about one of the songs on the record where the character J is talking to a priest and he asks, “Why did you become a priest?” And he says, “For the love of God.” And it’s a very funny joke about him being German. And so the character’s, not sure if that’s a joke or not, but talks about as a wedding singer, you’re like an observer to the situation, but at the same time, you’re kind of a participant in it too. And so I’m just curious, was it a comfortable arrangement for you as you began to perform at people’s weddings? Did you feel I kind of understand what I’m doing here, or did it take some getting used to in terms of the meaning of it all?

Jens Lekman: It took some getting used to. I think in the beginning it was just a fun thing. I have this part of myself that likes to put myself into awkward situations. I did a tour of people’s living rooms 10 years ago, for example, in very small towns, and it was very intimate, and sometimes you ended up with playing in these places with really weird people, but it was really fun, and I just like what that does to me when it takes me out of the ordinary.

So that was one of the motivations I had in the beginning to just do that. And another motivation was just to, because it felt special. It felt like I was doing something very special to be part of these people’s big day. But it did change over the years, I think, especially as it reflected my own relationships and my own relationship to love. There would be times when I was heartbroken after coming out of a long relationship and then having to go play a wedding and just standing on the side and thinking, yeah, we’ll see how long that will last. So yeah, it’s been weird. It is, as I say in the song, it is like being part of it, but still standing at the side. And I think the story is very much about being an observer in love.

AD: There’s a lyric on the record also where you sing “Love is brutally simple/it’s either there or it isn’t.” And I was thinking about if you’ve played a lot of weddings, statistically, not all of those marriages are going to last. And I was curious, has there ever been a moment where you’re at a wedding and you’re kind of like, I don’t think these two are going to go the distance, but it sounds like maybe occasionally you were thinking things like that, but it might’ve been more about your own internal state rather than what you’re seeing from them. 

Jens Lekman: Yeah, it was. I think the older I get, it’s sort of been reversed because in the past I would think, oh, these people they just met and they are throwing this lavish wedding. This is not a good recipe. They seem too chaotic. They seem too like a mismatch or something. And then I would see these people who just seem very harmonic and I would think that these people are going to make it. And now it’s almost the opposite in a way. It feels like the people who had it figured out, just lost interest in each other, and the people who were completely chaos and mismatches, they are thriving off of that somehow, or at least that’s my reflection as I’m in the middle of my forties and people are coming out of marriages now. People are getting divorced now, and it’s all the couples that I thought were going to make it, they’re getting divorced. And all the couples who I thought “good luck with that,” and they are still together. It could also be that they’re just stuck with each other. But it seems to be the recipe to stick together, just embrace the chaos.

Jens Lekman: I just turned 40 and I’ve had a few friends whose marriages are ending. And it is strange because so often you really like both people involved and you can sort of see well, that it would be better for them to be apart and be happy than it would be for them to stick with each other out of some sort of obligation. And yet at the same time, the whole marriage ceremony is sort of about accepting the obligation. The whole idea is, and now I’m going to agree to do this forever, even if I change my mind. And so I understand the tension there, but I think that’s another great reason why this book could have ended with the Jay character super happy and having it all figured out and at his own wedding or something like that. But that’s not how the book ends.

The book ends in a much more ambiguous, and some might say, I don’t want to spoil it for people. They should read the book, but regardless, it’s not a simple cut and dry thing. And so I feel like that makes this story and the way you’re approaching the concept of love on this record, all the more interesting, cause it’s not something so tidy. Love ends up being a really complicated thing. And I love that the record starts with the first love song and ends with the last love song. But in between all of those, you’ve got all these different shades of love that reveal themselves. And so I don’t know, I don’t know if you’re a fan of Nick Cave, the songwriter, but he has a really interesting lecture called “The Secret Life of the Love Song,” and he says, “The love song is perhaps the truest and most distinctive human gift for recognizing God and a gift that God himself needs.”

Now, I don’t think you have to be religious to sort of understand the notion there, which is almost like through love we come to understand ourselves and come to understand another person, but it’s a constant back and forth. It’s a constant feeding into each other. And I feel like somehow you really managed to get that with this record where they’re sort of like the characters are almost defining themselves and each other through their engagement with each other. And I guess that’s really all we do as humans when we’re in relation with other people. But I don’t know if that’s what everybody thinks about when they think about love. You know what I mean? I think people think about the movie romance, and there’s some of that in this too, but not just that. And so I guess as a fan of the term love or the concept of love, I really like how complicated you and David have made it in this. It’s not a on the nose thing, you know what I mean?

Jens Leklman: Yeah. And I think that’s also because we had those discussions and we kind of made it complicated for ourselves. I think in the beginning maybe it was a less complicated story, and then we started having these conversations, almost arguments about it. It’s like, what is this? Is this really how someone acts in a relationship? If someone treated me like that, I would break up with this person right away. Is this an abusive relationship? Is this person being a complete pathological narcissist here? I think what we landed in was that there was no way of a conclusion, so to speak. It wasn’t like we could land in something that was clean and an answer to everything. It was more like, this is the mess that we have dug up from our inner selves. And it’s funny and it’s horrible and it’s sweet. It’s all of those things.

AD: I mentioned your blog and people will the Small Talk section of your website, and people will sometimes send you comments or questions or thoughts or what have you. Somebody wrote in a couple months ago asking you about polyamory and you noted that society seems less suspicious about the number of partners that you might have as long as there’s at least one, or something along those lines. You’re saying that people seem most uncomfortable with somebody who is single and seemingly content. There seems to be something wrong with that in a lot of people’s eyes. Suspicious is maybe the word. I don’t know exactly, but I found myself listening to this record and thinking about that and trying to ask myself, what is it about the act of aloneness that freaks people out so much or the state of being alone? And of course, it’s this fear that if left alone with yourself, what if you find you don’t like yourself?

And that’s a pretty common thing that happens to us. But you realize, I think as maturity takes hold, that you really can’t be in any sort of arrangement with another person unless you have somehow managed to come to some kind of peace with yourself too, or acceptance of yourself. So that love thing works both ways, right? They say you have to love yourself to love somebody else, and I think that there must be some truth to that, but at the same time, the single status of our narrator at certain points, that’s not necessarily a tragedy. It doesn’t seem like you wanted to paint that as necessarily just a sad ending or something like that. Do you know what I mean? Without getting too personal or digging in too deep, are you single currently? Is that the situation or are you seeing somebody right now?

Jens Lekman: No, I’ve been single for years. I had a relationship and as we were working on this, and it definitely worked its way into this story, and a lot of it was about processing what it means to be alone. I think a song like “Wedding in Leipzig,” for example, which is also a story that I was kind of spoonfeeding David with, if there’s any real influence that I, there’s been a few chapters in the book where I’ve had some influence on the story, and that was one of them. And that was around a time when that my last relationship had ended. And I thought a lot about aloneness and what it means to be alone. In that story, the wedding singer J ends up at the singles table and he talks to two sisters who looked like Patty and Selma from The Simpsons, and one of them is a little bit bitter and has been married, and the other person is more, I think she’s someone who sees the romantic side of it, who sees these beautiful little moments here and there. And in the end, I think Jay sees her as almost, I wouldn’t say a role model, but he sees something in her. She has actually experienced something or has the answer to something.

I think the song ends with J DJing “I Want to Know What Love Is.” And he sings that. She looks like she knows the answer to the question that the song comprises. But yeah, I thought a lot about those things during the writing of this project. And now I don’t remember what your question was, but maybe I’ve already answered it. 

AD: I think so. We all know people. We all have been people at times where you say, am I going to be alone? And that’s a fear that people have. But I guess maybe one of the reasons why I find the word love so fascinating is because there are all different kinds of love. I mean, even definitionally, there’s agape “love,” which is love for everybody, familial love. Fraternal love. These different ways that you can feel love…

Jens Lekman: Or music.

AD: Or music, I mean, absolutely. Music is a kind of love for sure, and you feel love for people. You play music with almost instinctively you can’t even help it. You love that they’re there with you and that this thing is happening, but we often get so caught up in the notion of romantic love that we forget that just because maybe that’s not on the table, it doesn’t mean that all those other kinds of love aren’t abundant and around and maybe even enough to feel whole or feel some measure of peace or feel connected to other people. And so I like that. Obviously a book and a record about weddings is going to make people think about romantic love. But weddings are big gatherings where all sorts of love is being exchanged in different ways between parents and children and friends. And I don’t know a bride who wishes she was marrying somebody else in the audience.

I don’t know exactly what’s what, but I don’t know. I think about that a lot. And I think that that’s, and just even to go back to your blog, somebody sent in, this was the one that really floored me, Jens, was somebody sent in a YouTube video of their son playing “Black Cab.” Now for listeners who no doubt are picturing like a teenager with a guitar looking at the camera, no, this is a very small child kind of holding a guitar, not really strumming, picking open strings for the most part, but bizarrely and powerfully kind of performing this song of yours.

And I was kind of knocked out by it. And you sing on the new record just for one moment where you’re talking about almost having the envy of somebody who’s hearing your song because you are in the song. So again, we’re talking about this remove from the primacy of the thing, slightly observing or whatever, but watching that video, you got to experience your own song as if it were from outside of you, it seemed. And I just wonder what that experience feels like and to what degree you feel like you’ve experienced that at other times. I mean, has that happened other times? Probably never exactly like that, where a toddler is singing “Black Cab” so uniquely. But has that sort of thing happened to you at other moments to? 

Jens Lekman: And always with that song. It’s happened three times with that particular song, “Black Cab,” and I think the first time was when I went to see this Japanese band called Maher Shalal Hash Baz, you know them? They approach the instruments a bit like that kid did in that video, not as professional super well playing instrumentalists, but I think that they often play instruments that they don’t know how to play to sort of get that sort of amateurish feeling to it. And they sound like a school orchestra. And so they started playing this song, and I recognized it, but it sounded so different, but the melody was there and the words. So I immediately felt like I know this song so well. And I just started thinking that it was a Bob Dylan song, and then I realized that it was my song, and that was a very surreal moment.

That was the first time it’s ever happened to me. The second time, it was like that scene in the song that you’re mentioning on the new record where I was sitting at a bar and I heard it vaguely playing from a stereo, and I thought, I love this song. What is this? And the bartender just went, sure. And then he turned it up and I was like, oh, it’s my song. And then the third time was this kid. So it keeps happening with that particular song. And it’s a strange thing as a songwriter, you are so stuck within the mechanisms of what you have written that you never really get to enjoy it. You’re damaged by how close you are to the painting. You only see the brush strokes. So to be able to actually step out and see it for what it is as a listener, it’s a spectacular feeling.

AD: Yeah, I mean, I think that’s beautiful. And it’s like sometimes I’ll get kind of conceptual with friends when we’re talking about making music ourselves, and I have to remind myself that often I’m the first audience of my song, and that doesn’t feel natural per se, or you don’t think of it that way. I don’t, most of the time that’s not the way I think about it. It’s like, no, I’m figuring it out and I’ll get it and blah, blah, blah. But when I like it, when I like it, I do know, okay, now it’s moved into this next stage of existence, and from here on out, things will work. But you kind of think about that notion of you have to ease it into where it feels good to you and it becomes a good song to your ears. And sometimes songwriters will talk about feeling like something came from outside of them that they didn’t have all that much to do with it. Has it felt that way for you? Have you written songs where you kind of look back at a finished song and go, I’m not sure how involved I was, or is that a rarer thing for you?

Jens Lekman: Yeah, I mean, you mentioned Nick Cave before, and I think this is something that he comes back to often the feeling that it wasn’t yours to begin with, it came from somewhere else, and that you’re more like an archeologist or something. You’re digging in the dirt and then you uncover something. I love that song by Bill Fay, “Who is the Sender?” where he sings about sitting down by a piano and playing a song. And then he wonders where did it come from? Who is the sender? And yeah, it is a religious experience for sure.

AD: I think so. I think it’s the most, let’s say our age is not particularly religious. I don’t know if that’s actually true or not, I don’t know. But it’s still songs, music and the impact it has is still one way that religious things continue to happen for people and happen in the present. And you bringing up somebody like Bill Fay, he’s one of my all time favorites. I think he’s just about as good as it gets. He’s your sort of label mate, right? Because Dead Oceans, he’s passed away, obviously, but Dead Oceans and Secretly Canadian, sister labels and all that stuff. So I think about that. Nick Cave also talks about needing to, I like the way he describes coaxing a song towards him, inviting the muse and being careful, very careful not to scare it away because it’s easy to do. And I think that when people talk about writing a brilliant song, I wrote this incredible thing that can sound one way, but when somebody talks about almost feeling like it’s a gift given to them from something beyond themselves, I think that’s a pretty remarkable situation.

I know your songs have felt that way for me. I remember I bought the, I can’t remember what, maybe it was the Maple Leaves EP. I didn’t own the 7”, but I owned a CD. And I just remember listening to that over and over again and feeling like “Maple Leaves.” I don’t know. I felt like it was expressing something about my life in a way that I didn’t know yet. And you even talk about Mark E. Smith in that song, and I had just started working at a record store, and I had one coworker who was obsessed with the fall, and so he was constantly giving me fall music. And so I’m listening to Mark E. Smith and The Fall and I’m listening to you. You are singing about Mark E. Smith. You don’t sound like The Fall. You know what I mean? These are two different kinds of music.

But in that moment just sort of being like, wow, yeah, this is my life now. I work in a record store and I live in a city that’s new to me and I’m listening to this music, and it’s the songs they felt like they were written just for me. They were soundtracking my life. And now all these years later, one, it’s great to get the opportunity to speak with you and share that with you, but two, I’ve started to realize like, oh, well, that’s the magic thing music can do for us is make us feel like it was written just for us. And at a wedding, all the music is like that, right? Everybody’s thinking, this is our song. This is a song that explains our situation. And so for you to be a part of that in a concrete sense, the way you are, and then also to have made all these great records that people have gone off and had all these experiences with, I don’t know. I think I want to say it must be humbling, but I don’t know if that’s even the term that you would use, but it does feel like it’s part of a broader conversation than simply, I wrote these words in this melody, and here it is. It feels like it’s much more, the human condition to some degree is what we’re talking about right here. You know what I mean?

Jens Lekman: Yeah. And also the state of music. I mean, one reason why I kept playing weddings was because I felt like music lost something around the 2010s when streaming came in and music started becoming something more like a scented candle, something nice to put on in the background. And I also felt like music lost its power in a way. It became toothless. Because it wasn’t able to function on its own, it had to go through these big companies and you had to ask Mr. Red Bull for money. Everything was sold through something else. Music just became the content to sell technology or energy drinks or whatever. So it became toothless in a way, and it just felt like it lost its purpose for a while. And playing at weddings and seeing these couples who the songs meant something for, it was really important to me to not lose faith in music, just to see the songs, to be reminded of what the songs meant for people

AD: In 2022, two of your great records, Oh, Your So Silent Jens and Night Falls Over Kortedala, you had to take some of this stuff down basically off these streaming services due to sample clearances. And I don’t know if the situation was, sample clearances were less strict when those albums originally came out or whatever it was that you had to deal with those records. Of course, you’ve reimagined them and put them back into the world in different ways as The Cherry Trees Are Still in Blossom and The Linden Trees Are Still in Blossom. So those records and the songs on them, they can be accessed. But those original versions going away, I mean, I just have to imagine, was that just a tremendous drag on one level? I mean, it would’ve been for me, was that a difficult moment, and did it feel a little bit like it was connected to that thing you were saying about the streaming services sort of tainting it somehow? Did it feel like that was connected to you?

Jens Lekman: I’m not sure if it was connected. I mean, it is connected to the evolution of technology for sure. But I don’t think it was connected to the sense of the loss of meaning, really. It was more just technology came to a point where, I mean, Shazam, you know how easy it discovers music. You can just hold it up in a bar and it recognizes the song being played, and that technology can also be used for other things. For example, discover very old obscure samples in an old song or less obscure samples in a song that you could kind of get away with 20 years ago. And so, yeah, I guess if there’s a connection, it’s the feeling of living in this hyper-technological world where technology becomes like a prison in a way where it takes away meaning and where it takes away the little places where you could do things without being commodified, without things becoming products, or where you could get away with some stuff.

But it was a drag, and it wasn’t something that, I mean, I wouldn’t have rerecorded those records if it wasn’t for the necessity of it. I just realized that it was in this age, it would be like the records never existed in the first place. And so I wanted those records to be a portal to the old records. I wanted people to understand that these are placeholders for the old records. I still really like what I did with them, and I’m not someone who is crazy about having the past archiving things. I played with an idea for a while about letting my records have expiration dates, where at some point in the future, they would just expire and not be available anymore. But I also, I have a soft spot for those two records and I miss them being available. 

AD: Yeah. Well, I think it brought to mind two things to me. One, when you’re reinterpreting your own songs and when you are replaying certain parts or tapping into those, on one hand, it’s probably a cool reminder that the song is not the same thing as the record. It’s not even the same thing as the recording. It’s its own entity that lives and can be done. I remember the very first episode of this podcast we had Will Oldham on, Bonnie “Prince “Billy, and I was asking him about the fact that sometimes he’ll have a song appear in different records in different styles, sometimes different project names, but the same song over and over again. And I remember being, does it ever feel like you’re covering yourself or you’re blah, blah, blah? And he was like, no, no, no. The song’s not the record. The song is the song. And so it’s okay. Don’t worry about it. 

That said, I love those records. I love the way that those records sounds. I love the sample-based stuff. I love that you were in a zone that was sort of adjacent to the avalanches. I remember just being so blown away by those records when they came out and loving the way you could re-textualize stuff. There are still samples on your records. There are samples on this new record. I am sure that they’re all perfectly cleared and you don’t have to worry about it. But I have to say, on one level, there’s almost something kind interesting about the fact that those other versions of those records are not immediately accessible. But if you are a little industrious, you could probably find them still. So they aren’t really gone. They sort of still exist sort of in this maybe unofficial capacity. And I wonder if there’s any part of you that feels a little bit of a satisfaction with that knowing that like, okay, so this streaming paradigm, which is starting to feel like a prison, our phones are starting to feel like prisons. Our technology is starting to feel a little bit like a prison. But if you exit the jail and wander into the wilderness, you could maybe find those old records and experience them. I wonder if there’s any part of you that’s like, yeah, that’s kind of a fun byproduct of this thing.

Jens Lekman: Yeah, I’m not against the internet. I’m not full on Ted Kaczynski when it comes to technology. I mean, part of the reason why I’m so sad about Spotify, for example, is because my career started at a time when internet was connected to the pirate movement and all that. And everything was more like the Wild West. I mean, my song started spreading through Soulseek in the beginning, which was the file sharing program that people used around that time, which was filled with music enthusiasts. And so I know what Spotify could have been. That’s what makes me sad that it became so boring. It could have been amazing. I hope that people can start imagining other things, even though I’m sure an alternative to Spotify could seem as farfetched as not having a system based on capitalism or something like that. But it is possible. It’s just that we have to imagine it.

AD: The great science fiction writer, Ursula K Le Guin talked about that it has become so hard for us to imagine a world without capitalism, but that we could, because the divine right of kings was once the default setting, and we decided that’s not the way it should work anymore. We imagine something different. And so I hope exactly like you’re saying that we don’t let our Spotify’s only been around. It hasn’t been around forever. There were other things before it and pray, tell there will be other things after it. Because I do think that, I mean, it’s the same as the internet. It’s hard not to get a little bit Ted Kaczynski when you feel like the internet was supposed to represent infinite variety and infinite places you could go. But for most of us, the internet has become five websites and some apps that we pay monthly to rent access to music that could just go away if conditions force it to.

And so I feel like you really are of that generation of artists. You were just sort of right before that where you got to reap a little bit of the benefit of what the internet might be like a free and open internet. But corporate interests have definitely pushed that into other forms and other shapes. And I do hope we can imagine our way outside of those. But Jens, it’s been such a blast talking with you about this stuff. I really enjoy this record. Like I mentioned, it’s so funny, but it’s really caused me to spend a lot of time in my own imagination thinking about what love means to me, thinking about my marriage, thinking about my friends and their marriages. And I got to say, it’s just been a real, real pleasure. And we’re talking about, I’ve been listening to your music for 20 years and 20 years in, you’ve got a record that is just as surprising and compelling as anything that you put out in the beginning. More so in some ways. And so I just wanted to thank you for making it and continuing this process. And I think you’re going to be in Arizona in a couple months. And so I’m really looking forward to seeing you do these songs live.

Jens Lekman: Yeah. Is that where you are?

AD: I’m in Arizona. Yeah. And I’ve seen you at, I think the Crescent Ballroom before too. So I’ve seen you there. Are you touring with a full band, or are you going to be by yourself, or what’s the upcoming tour look like?
Jens Lekman: It’s a full band. It’s a great band. Really amazing musicians. And yeah, we’re just working on some amazing stage costumes right now. There’s a song on the record called “Tuxedo Sewn for Two.” That’s going to be a reality. We’re working on that.

 

 
 Posted on September 17, 2025September 17, 2025Jens Lekman Podcast
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });