# Transmissions :: Yuka Honda

**Transmissions — Yuka Honda** · _2025-04-30_ · by Jason Woodbury · `podcast`
**Tags:** Yuka Honda, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/04/30/transmissions-yuka-honda/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://acrossthehorizon.bandcamp.com/music

## Body

This week on the show, the great Yuka Honda. She’s a New York musician. In the 1990s, she emerged from the fertile New York music underground with Cibo Matto alongside groups like the Beastie Boys, Sonic Youth, and Luscious Jackson. She’s collaborated with an extensive roster of musicians, including John Zorn,David Byrne, Yoko Ono, Sean Ono Lennon, and her husband, guitarist Nels Cline. 

Earlier this year, we taped the conversation you’re about to hear. Some of it ran as text in the Across the Horizon zine that was available at Big Ears Music Fest. What is Across the Horizon? Well, it’s a collaborative series from Bob Holmes of Suss and Northern Spy Records gathering together like-minded artists drawn “from the wide landscape of instrumental music” (including Luke Schneider, Marisa Anderson, William Tyler and more) to curate a series of digital releases that will culminate in a double LP compilation of stellar sonic explorations on August 13th. Under her Eucademix banner, Yuka has explored experimental electronics via two semi recent Farm Psychedelia EPs and her Across The Horizon contribution “A Long Slow Blink Before The Answer.”  In this conversation, we get into food, art, language, and much more.

Transmissions :: Yuka Honda

Next week on Transmissions: Dean Wareham 

Aquarium Drunkard: Hello, Yuka, how are you?



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Yuka Honda:  Hi. I am good, thank you.

AD: Thank you so much for taking the time to chat. I’m really looking forward to it. I have lots of stuff I want to ask you about, so thanks so much. I’m excited to ask you a few questions about your contribution to the “Across the Horizon” compilation, “A Long Slow Blink Before The Answer.” Something that I was really interested in: I listened to you on another podcast, a great Wilco podcast (Wilco the Podcast), and you were talking about how you think your first language might be more like an image based thing versus a specific language, be it Japanese or English or anything like that. I was curious with “Across the Horizon” contribution, the idea is that musicians who are involved are from a wide landscape of instrumental music. I was curious to get this conversation started, if images are almost always a part of your musical process in terms of your imagination. How is that related and how does it relate to instrumental music where you don’t have to put a set of lyrics to the emotional landscape of what you’re creating?

Yuka Honda: I was thinking about it just the other day as well because there were times I had to speak many languages when my brain was developing. It wasn’t formed yet and I had to speak in many languages and that made me get my thoughts and then I use whatever language that I can communicate with whom I’m communicating with, determine the language I use. But that’s just the tool that I use and I have these thoughts before it. I think I have kind of a language feeling to the sound as well. And they’re not as defined as words because words are pretty digital. They pinpoint stuff and your thoughts are more like analog. There’s a lot of things that are in between words and often sounds are capable to carry this what we may call an abstract realm of the meaning, but they’re my language as well, so I kind of make music how I speak.

AD: I really like to hear that. I wonder how did you to get started with “A Long Slow Blink Before the Answer”, which is a beautiful title. What kinds of things did you conceive of before you started putting this thing together? Or how did it work for you? Because you sample Dave Harrington and Nicole McCabe on this. Did you start off with just listening to those materials and seeing what sparked your imagination or how does the process get kickstarted for you?

Yuka Honda: I did definitely listen to the samples. I really love this concept because first I was having anxiety, and I felt like, which idea do I tap in to? So I was very excited that Dave came up with this idea that we make samples for each other because sounds are usually the best entrance for my writing. So I listen to the sounds and I’m not religious, but quite often you hear artists say “God spoke to me and God told me to do this.” I have similar experiences, but I don’t really feel like somebody is telling me to do this. But it kind of magically appears. I followed this maybe intuition or hunch that comes. I had this sample idea, but also kind of was scrolling through my sound banks and I really liked that opening sound that I used, which is kind of Southeast Asian bell-y instruments. I was just jamming with it and I felt that that can go into Dave’s beautiful guitar thing that he played. So I thought that I don’t want to just play samples. I kind of want to string them with my own ideas. So I was looking for an entry point, and when I found that entry point, I really liked that kind of beginning. I tend to have this kind of beginning that’s simple and inviting, but somehow mysterious. I felt like, this is a nice way to introduce Dave’s beautiful guitar line, but also wanted to introduce Nicole’s beautiful saxophone line. I do a lot of cooking, you know when you’re cooking you go like, oh, maybe I’m going to add meat to this, or how about I add chopped onion at the end of this food? I’m a little bit ADD. These ideas come in and out a lot.

AD: I love that you titled it, as I mentioned, “A Long Slow Blink Before the Answer”, and I thought that was so beautiful, especially because in the notes you expressed that, well two things. You’re talking about how you would normally sort of take a long form composition, but because of the structures of this compilation, you were trying to distill it down into a shorter, almost like a pop music length, even though it’s still very experimental and you fit a lot into three and a half minutes. But you talked about how the title you said reminded you of a blink of Brahma, which is said to span over 3 trillion years. So I thought about that idea of a vast amount of time somehow encapsulated into the smallest measurement of time. And I wonder, you mentioned that you’re not religious, but it seems like music in terms of its relationship with time, music is a reliable way that we can stretch time and experience it in different ways. Is that how it is for you? Do you often find yourself sort of that thing of you’re playing something and then you realize, oh I’ve been playing for a half hour. You know what I mean, in terms of that kind of attention? Do you like to work in a longer format?

Yuka Honda: Not always, but with this jam, every time I played it naturally, it was ending around six minutes and a half. I like to improvise and jam and play to compose, especially instrumental music. I feel like we are allowed to have more free form of music, so I let my sensory system guide me and follow it. And I did say I’m not religious, but I only mean in terms of, I don’t belong to any religious group or any religious thoughts. I do love reading about all the scriptures and their teaching because I feel like every religion has incredible eye-opening insights about things. I’m reading Joseph Campbell who studied multiple religions and thought that a lot of them talk about the same thing, and one of the recurring theme is time and time is a very interesting thing. For example, I was just reading about the Zen idea of time and in one school of zen, they don’t think of time in terms of chronological event. It’s not about there’s a past or future, it’s called uji. I was just writing it down because I relate to this feeling a lot. We all know time is relative, so if the music is good, time passes very fast.

AD: It’s interesting because you talked about at the start of the conversation, this sort of the way that you experienced sound as the primary driver of communication. I think in a certain way that for those of us who maybe grew up in one language more specifically the way I did, it’s like your relationship between the word and the sound. You don’t think about it because it’s always represented that, but it makes me think about how easy it is to, there’s that sort of idea of mistaking the map for the territory. This idea that we name something, we give it a form and then we stick so closely to it. I think we do that with time a lot. We think an hour means this, but an hour can mean any number of things in that hour, right? It’s like when we get so stuck to our symbols, it’s the forest for the trees or something like that. Music is one of those ways where especially with the electronic or experimental music that you’re working with, you can juxtapose very different things and create a new sensation of time, and I think that’s such a cool way for you to honor the idea of across the horizon. It’s interesting, you also talked about how you grew up reading a lot and I’m curious, these days, so many people are expressing an inability to properly focus enough to read. I struggle with it myself. I still do make time to read, but what used to come so natural is becoming harder to access. I’m curious what your relationship with reading looks like these days, as somebody who grew up reading so much?

Yuka Honda: I am also experiencing this modern problem. We got used to reading a lot of short excerpts, and also I’m reading a lot of things. I’m very curious about things, so I’m constantly reading internet and now we have access to so many information, so I can just read up massive amount of information every day, which is great in one way, but books, you need patience. You can’t have your phones around. I find myself listening to books a lot more because I live in the country now, and that means I have a lots of long driving time because all our walks are in the city, and so going back and forth with the city. We live really in the middle of nowhere, so just to go grocery shopping, it’s 40 minutes one way. So it’s a really good time for me to listen to the books, so I often listen to the books because we have that option now.

AD: What books do you like to listen to?

Yuka Honda: I was listening to Richard Powers, I think it’s called Bewilderment. I’ve listened to this book maybe four times now, and all the books that I want to check out, I listen to them.

AD: I find that I have returned to specific audio books multiple times because when you’re listening that way, you absorb the information differently than you would were you reading it. What your eye is attracted to is different than your ear. But I do really think audio books…maybe it’s cool that so many of us experience them that way because often good writing has an incantatory quality. The language that is effective, spoken out loud, tends to be very effective in just conveying information. You know what I mean?

Yuka Honda: Yeah, I agree. And also your book, it just keeps reading. When I read the books, every line I read, if it’s great imaginative books, my mind just starts imagining stuff and sometimes it takes forever to read one page and I go back and forth and sometimes it’s nice that somebody else is reading on their pace, so I’m actually following the story and not get caught up in my own mind, which my mind can be in the way of many things.

AD: Yeah, I very much empathize. I understand what you mean. Well, I’m curious, even though Across the Horizon, this project, it’s not bound by any genre. Bob Holmes and the Suss guys, they are sort of associated with this idea of ambient Americana or ambient cosmic country, or however you want to call it, ambient country. I’m curious what your sort of relationship to some of those sounds might be, and when, if at all, you remember encountering American country music or blues or roots in terms of your own listening. You listen to so much music, so what were some of the formative experiences for you in terms of, let’s say broadly defined American roots music? When did that start to enter into your listening life?

Yuka Honda: I’ll be honest with you that most of my vocabulary for most of my lifetime, and it’s really since I met my husband Nels [Cline], and I go watch Wilco play, but they are my entrance to Americana country music like lap steel, pedal steel, that sound is something new to me, and so it’s actually nice to be experiencing something new at my age because I listen to all kinds of music, but I’m bored with everything. So it’s nice. It’s not true. I’m actually not bored with everything. But it’s nice to get introduced to new music, which even though it’s not a new music, but for me it’s new.

AD: Yeah, that’s fascinating. I think about you’ve been involved in so many different records over the years and worked with so many types of people, so you can look at your engagement with them and see their engagement with country music or something similar. I think about a record you’ve had many collaborations with Sean Lennon, and of course I think about a record like Friendly Fire, which was sort of like a ‘70s singer songwriter record with those Beatle-ish overtones that is just as much of part of the vocabulary with Wilco, right? Americana, however we call that, or country or experimental country or ambient, however we want to shake those definitions down. There’s so much natural synthesis that is happening there. So when I look at your body of work, that happens across all genres in your body of work as well, right? Hip-hop and electronic and lounge and you’re drawing from whatever. I feel like they do it in a similar way, right? Wilco’s doing that. So it’s almost like there’s a universal way that musicians synthesize ideas like genre to the point that maybe they don’t matter. Does genre feel like it matters to you?

Yuka Honda: To me, I never thought of genre. The only time I think of genre is when I’m shopping. If I have specific album that I’m looking for, then I have to think about it and then I go like, oh, that’s probably in Brazilian. Maybe samba is in another section, or it’s convenient in that way, but when I’m making it or listening to music, I really never care. It’s something that I think music is first and then we categorize it just for convenience. And I think also maybe some people feel like when they know the genre, they understand the music more, but my brain just never worked that way. I’m not sure why. I’m very omnivore with everything I do, and my taste is very strong, so if I like it, I like it and if I don’t like it, I don’t like it. So, if I think in genre, there’s going to be so many things that I like and I don’t like in one group of music, so I’m not thinking about this bracket ever and happy that electronic music today is growing fencelessly. There’s no fence. I think ambient music, electronic music, I think we’re in a fortunate genre that we don’t really have to worry about. Is this house music or is it your music or who cares?

AD: The freedom of who cares. But I also think that what you’re talking about is very interesting because genre is not- what I think what’s cool about thinking about sort of so many people. I remember encountering the Cibo Matto records, and there was this sort of moment in the ‘90s where this sort of genre agnostic pollination was happening with an underground to the mainstream that still had access to the distribution channels of the mainstream. I think about how at that moment for me, encountering a group like the Beastie Boys or any of the Grand Royal stuff you saw the way they were juxtaposing, sampling jazz records with break beats and then funk and Cibo Matto was pulling from everything else. 

It was a grab bag of all the culture that had come before. It was a sample culture and that instilled the idea that even if genre is real, it’s fun to play it against itself and other things and not ever get too precious about just sticking to one thing. When I think about your work or another person associated with your husband Nels, Julian Lage, I think about him and I think about the through line of John Zorn, somebody who would juxtapose speed metal with jazz and these Weegee photos. So he’s creating a whole thing of collage juxtaposition. I feel like that’s also one way that you can play with genre or that you play with genre in a sort of playful way that doesn’t ever get stuck or bogged down. I think that’s just really a fascinating approach and thinking about how important that the way you all demonstrated that in the nineties to influence artists who have then taken it forward to this place now where, as you said, the lines between house and garage and everybody’s into everything sort of. It’s really cool. Does it feel like a cool time to you?

Yuka Honda: Yeah, I think basically my education of music happened because I lived in downtown New York and I was actually living one block away from the original Knitting Factory where I discovered John Zorn and all this experimental avant garde, mainly jazz-oriented music. I found people to play hip-hop music with live instruments. I’m meeting experimentation and mixing things that you’re not supposed to. So at the beginning of Cibo Matto, before we got signed, I would use a lot of recognizable samples like Led Zeppelin and Gang of Four and things that people can recognize because I really wanted people to hear that can this music can actually be played together and make something new, and I find that to be very exciting. 

I’m sorry, I’m always using food as an example. In the country I grew up with, we feel very free to mix food, so we take Italian pasta, but we put Japanese ingredients on top of it, put soy sauce on top of it, mix it with raw egg or whatever, and the goal is for it to taste good. I think we want it taste good. I think it’s also nice to introduce new ideas constantly because if we do the same thing all the time, it gets stale. I think it becomes very safe and there’s a quality in your authentic approach as well. I’m not denying it, but I think humans are meant to evolve. So in order to evolve, we need to mutate, mutation stimulates evolution, and so I think what we are trying to do is to create this mutation by experimenting by mixing things, and I’m not really so conscious of mixing things. I am just very excited about new combination and that sparks the joy.

AD: Yeah, it’s funny because you talk about early hip-hop was sampling John Bonham, right? Or I think about The KLF and those guys sort of aggressively sampling Abba or on those early singles that I think they had to destroy in the early days, it really did seem like in sample culture, you could grab anything, but by the time that Cibo Matto gets involved, it’s become more complicated. The Beastie Boys already had to go through the legal ramifications of the Paul’s Boutique era to where they got much more conservative with their samples from other artists, but started creating their own and learning to just treat their own recordings with the same sample mentality. So I see that obviously Cibo Matto comes in and helps to expand that idea so greatly, and along with your work with Sean and so many others, that really was really, I feel like in some ways sort of the last true expression of that New York counter-culture that goes back to, I don’t know, I guess the ‘40s into the ‘50s. It’s bloomed, but it’s sort of really not, I don’t want to say the end of that, but it’s really the last time where that was in the mainstream. You know what I mean? And it’s a really interesting era to look back on when you look back on it, were you aware of how singular that moment was, or were you just living in it, not even considering it?

Yuka Honda: I didn’t know how singular it was, but I remember the excitement of the time and New York City was not as gentrified yet, but gentrification was coming. So we are in this weird mixture of: we’re annoyed by gentrification, but me as a woman, I was benefiting from city becoming a little safe. So we were out all night, every day. We were able to roam East Village where we couldn’t before. It was too dangerous to. I remember all the shows were $5 to get in, so we were able to go see so many shows, and we were definitely thriving and everybody lived in downtown New York, so it was a big dormitory as well. I rode a bike and I literally stopped at the house of John Medeski, and he was living with Chris Wood…[I’d] just knock on the door and go in and hang out and jam on his prepared piano. It was an incredible time, which is not happening anymore. 

You mentioned the Cibo’s beginning of sampling different stuff. The first album I was conscious of sampling European music with a beat, so like movie soundtracks was big. That was because we were very into movies and we went to see a lot of movies and there were direct inspiration to a lot of our music, and we also liked Hip Hop beat, so we just combined it, and it created the music that was appealing to us. And also I wanted to talk about Sean because I produced his first album, and it was really surprising to me because I imagine Sean wrote a lot of beautiful songs with words and melodies and chords. He wrote beautiful chord changes. Actually, he’s a pretty deep writer if you listen to it. He wrote amazing chord changes, but then he said he wanted to record with Dave Douglas and all my jazz friend, and he wrote jazz songs for his album, and he insisted that they need to go onto his review album. I’m really not conservative, but I was, for a second, are you sure you want to do that? [Laughs] Because that is a true mixture of genre, but he really wanted to do it. It was a part of his expression that was important to him, and so that’s why we did it.

AD: I just recently read Francis Ford Coppola was writing about, he got nominated for a bunch of Razzies for Metropolis, which I still haven’t seen, so I don’t have an opinion on the movie yet. But basically he took the opportunity, the Razzies, of course, making fun of the movie or whatever, saying it’s the worst. He was in an industry that is so afraid of risk. I view this as a badge of honor. I’m so excited to join the ranks of many perceived artistic failures that were an artist is following their gut. That is a very rare thing, and I think about somebody like Sean Lennon, as you mentioned, he’s been willing to follow his inspiration wherever it leads him, whether it’s into progressive rock sounding stuff, or I think about that record Friendly Fire, which I mentioned, which I know you play on that record, but that’s a more sort of straightforward record that shows that side of him. I’m sure there were lots of people at the label saying, just do more of this. And he was like, no, I’m going to go do whatever I want. 

And it seems like that’s an ethos that when you look at the Beastie Boys, yourself, Sean, everybody who was associated with that kind of scene in the nineties, it seems like everybody was, or even Mike Watt, somebody else who I think of as this sort of singular trailblazer, punk jazz follows his gut wherever, and obviously you’ve worked with Mike Watt as well, and so anyway, everybody was following that, and really, it’s an inspiring thing to this day.

Yuka Honda: I do admire Francis Ford Coppola. He’s a real artist. We are here to express something, and of course, we would like to also sell and make living out of what we make because we need to live and we need to eat, and we also need to buy new equipment.

AD: Yeah, exactly. Which is always expensive. Or a lot of times it’s probably more, it used to be very expensive, right? I’m sure that was a huge impediment as an electronic musician in the early days.

Yuka Honda:  I don’t like to spend money, so I complain every time I have to buy something, but I do acknowledge them to be much cheaper today. My first sampler was the Akai S900, and it was $4,000, and it was one megabyte. I didn’t pay the full price. I didn’t have the money, so I bought it from somebody else. I bought the used one, but it was still $1,200. I remember it very well because it was so much money for me at the time. But we did it. It was like you dream of something, and these instruments are, people need piano to make music, and you also need to buy these machines to make music. So it’s a necessary expense, I guess.

AD:  You’ve talked a little bit about, I believe, because you’re somebody who often will come up with conceptual elements to some of your music. I was thinking about the way you’ve evoked AI or the ideas about AI. It’s a fascinating technology, and I feel like we’re maybe in a moment where we’re suffering from everything getting called the same thing. People say AI, some people are so loose with that definition that it can mean almost anything, any electronic change of or whatever or using it. But I’m curious, what do you think? Do you feel like that this technology, is there some interest on your end to see what kind of tools get developed? As somebody who’s never been afraid of using machines to make music, I feel like maybe you have some unique insight into whether or not we need to do fear these technologies. How do you think we should approach this stuff?

Yuka Honda: AI is a big gamble that all humans are now. If you go to Las Vegas, I think you enter the game by putting the chip on the board or something, but with AI, we didn’t have an option. We are in, the gamble has started and it’s going with all these powerful people, competing with each other, and also interesting, whimsical people making interesting whimsical machines. So like you said, there are so many layers of AI exploration, and I think we only get to observe to some degree of this bigger game. It’s definitely dangerous in terms of military interest, and I don’t know what’s going to happen to many jobs, but so far I don’t think it’s replacing musicians, for example. I think it’s replacing maybe certain music that people use as wallpaper, and so we need to come up with how to deal with that. But as somebody who’s been using machines, I’m feeling friendly to AI that I can access, and I like to do research or write things with Chat GPT. Especially, I need somebody to help me with my English grammar and spelling. So it’s so great to have someone, I call mine Chappy and Chappy can correct my English, and then it may say like, oh, how about this and that. But I don’t really, I just think of it like my other machines, and I take suggestions, but I think I use it as a tool. And also there’s some AI plugins that I have gotten, and I use it as a randomizer, so it does make some kind of random noise. And I use it in the same way as I use a saxophone sample. And right now it’s really interesting. I think AI has its own mind because it’s learning from human, but it doesn’t have humans experience. It doesn’t have a body, so it just learns from other machines, but we learn from using our hands, looking at our hands from many different directions and learn that when you have five fingers, you look at it from any way. We always have five fingers, but AI doesn’t really know that sometimes, and it does interesting psychedelic things. So as an artist, I find it really interesting so far, and I don’t really know where it goes basically. I don’t know, it’s ai, but it’s human programming. AI is human. We are not really there with everybody’s benevolence. Humans have a lot of problems.

AD: That’s true. And partially, I wonder if maybe, and this is something that could be interesting or helpful, is that if it helps us define, we don’t always even define what humanity is. You know what I mean? We act in these, like you said, obviously very barbaric ways still to this day, these powerful countries enacting wars that people don’t want these wars to happen. So it’s like we already feel afraid that some sort of machinery has taken over people’s brains or some sort of binary thinking, but that’s why I keep being drawn back to your idea of a pre-language set of meaning making. That is, to me, we need so much more of that. The ability to even conceive of, there are two words for that, but there are not just two words. There are actually hundreds of words and to always remember that. So I do wonder if technology is connected us all so much, maybe this crazy technology is somehow trying to tell us something about what being human actually is. And maybe if we could figure that out, then we could use it for really good purposes. But as far as art goes, you can create all sorts of interesting juxtapositions. Most of the time you see AI generated video art and you’re like, that looks boring and looks like you made it using just AI. But then you see somebody can play with that and maybe remix it and create, maybe juxtaposing is actually where the humanity comes in or the art itself. So the raw materials might be somewhat immaterial in a certain sense. I don’t know. But it’s a very interesting moment for sure.

Yuka Honda: Yeah, basically I think AI is a reflection of human, and I think we are afraid of AI because of it, because we observe human constantly committing seven deadly sins. We are a very simple species who are programming this machine. So I think that’s why we are afraid of it, and so we can control the AI by developing ourselves.

AD: Yeah, that’s interesting. It’s funny too, because you on the Farm Psychedelia II album, you have the song “A Camel to UFO”, and I often think that that’s why we’re afraid of things like AI. We’re afraid of things like UFOs because maybe they somehow do reflect back to us what we don’t know or something like that. And it’s scary to us, but I don’t know what “A Camel to UFO”, I don’t know where you came up with that title, so I don’t want to assume that you are seeing UFOs or anything like that.

Yuka Honda: Well, it’s not that I believe in this theory, but I like to entertain this idea that I learned that from pyramids. Pyramids are designed in a way that from one room you can see a star in a certain way. It’s an incredible calculation that it does. And pyramid itself is incredible. And human also is a very interesting species. I think we really actually, in terms of animal world, we are this small not so strong species that became so powerful, and now we took over and we’re acting as though we, gods we are in charge of, we’re charge in some ways, we are very powerful, basically. I guess that’s what I’m trying to say. I think it’s because we are this weird species that everybody has different combination of DNA, that’s a human program. So everybody is different. I don’t know if any other animals are like that. I really observe everybody to be completely different from each other, even within your family, within your tribe, we all have different ideas and different structures, which I think makes us strong as a species. So if we have 8 billion people on earth and maybe some bacteria is going to attack us, and certain kind of DNA people may disappear from the face of earth, but the other half will survive, and we are made in this way that we will constantly be surviving because we are not the same. If we are all the same, then I think one thing can take us all out. And because of the structure and because all these people, different people are creating AI from completely different point of view, AI could turn out at the end this beautiful thing to unite us. It’s possible. I don’t just imagine Terminator 2 is going to happen.

AD: It’s funny because I saw that movie as a young kid, and I mean the imprint that it makes on the imagination, but then you think about how many dystopian visions we have now and how many of even our science fiction people seem only capable of imagining the worst case scenario. And I understand why, because things are very bad on so many fronts, but I feel like a certain kind of both and thinking is really required right now to also be able to imagine all sorts of potentially possible scenarios that aren’t bad utopian scenarios, even to some degree, nothing will be perfect, and it will always be a project of continuing to refine it. But that idea you said about mutation musical artistically, culturally, spiritually, I think Ursula K. Le Guin, the great science fiction writer, she said, “God is change.” And I think that I know what she means on some level, right? It’s like God is the process. I love this. You don’t always yourself a musical composer. You sometimes call yourself a decomposer. And I think that’s part of what we’re talking about too, right? This idea that maybe we don’t have to think of time in a chronological sense. Maybe we think of it in a loop sense. We think of it in terms of cycles of growth and decay, right? Decomposition. I don’t know. I find so much fun imaginative energy in your music, and it’s nice to hear that. It’s a place of possibility, and I think that’s a great thing that courses through your discography.

Yuka Honda: Thank you. I do think that everybody loves dystopian and everybody loves to make dystopian stories. And I a little bit, I feel like we can also do other things from all the times. I think, I mean, tragedy makes drama. So all the opera is tragedy. We love, of course, our brain is obsessed with what’s not working or what’s wrong. So dystopian, oh, horrible. Things definitely grab people’s attention very fast. But I do wonder, can we offer something else? It doesn’t even have to be utopian, but I love that you said God is change. Can we talk about transformation? I like to think about transformation, transcendence, dystopian is kind of a little stuck. It’s in the same place, but I am really interested in transformation and transcendence, like you said, God is love. And also Le Guin said god is love. I was just watching Laurie Anderson’s Heart of Dog. It’s a really, really great short film that I’ve watched maybe at this point 10 times. It’s very deep and in which the lead sings. What is love? Love is time. So if God is change and love is time, these are the subjects that we talked about today. It’s something that I think all the time.

AD: Yeah, that’s beautiful. That’s beautiful. And you’re very right. And it’s funny, you mentioned Joseph Campbell earlier, and I know that for a lot of people, they find the way he found the common threads between various religions. Some people view that almost as diminishing their individuality. I don’t though. I think I am hearing in what you are saying, another way of thinking about it, which is to say we are all different. And then there’s also ways that we’re all the same. And it’s just under understanding that balance of if you project onto another person, all your fears, they become what you fear. It’s like this is what we do and it’s why we’re able to convince ourselves for little Gods walking around, like you said. We do need to be disabused of that notion. But I do think that there’s still some very positive things about humanity too, and art is that. Before we wrap up, I wanted to ask you, I am such a fan of Between My Head and the Sky, Yoko’s album from 2009. I think that stands with her top five best records. I think that’s such a good record.

Yuka Honda: Thank you. I’m so happy to hear that.

AD: That was a record where, as you are probably aware, I’m sure you’ve heard this before, there is this sort of anti-Yoko contingent among the more conservative Beatles fans and growing up immersed in that. I was working in a record store when Between My Head and the Sky came out and I put it on and I was like, this is 10 times more punk rock than anything that anybody else is playing in here. I love that record. It’s such a great record. I wondered if you could share any reflections you have of making that one with Yoko and the Plastic Ono Band at that point.

Yuka Honda: I mean, it was incredible experience to work with Yoko. Yoko definitely doesn’t care about; I’m trying to watch my language. She really doesn’t give a fuck about any genre or anything. She just knows what she wants and what she wants to do. And she’s a true punk rocker. Punk rock is really interesting because when it came out, it was very striking. It was very different and new. And also we felt the energy aggression, almost violent energy. And then we got kind of used to it. It got normalized and it became a genre. And then we can say like, oh, let’s make punk rock song, [screams] we finish playing and it’s like, oh, thank you very much. But Yoko is a real punk. She’s a true punk rock star. She would just start screaming. We were like, wait, tape’s not rolling, Yoko.

AD: She’s already in it.

Yuka Honda: She’s totally in it. She is there. I loved also, it was really interesting to work with her Between My Head and The Sky, because Sean wanted to make the album very produced. I mean, not over-produced, but Yoko tend to want everything to be not rehearsed the first time played. She really wanted to have this experience that it’s like your first step on the snow and your sense is really open and everything is new and fresh, and also your mind and senses are working. Your radars are working 200% because it’s the first time you’re not used to anything. She really loved that energy, which is really great. But Sean also wanted to combine this produced band energy into it. So we had to constantly find this balance of making the music, but also letting her just be, and it doesn’t matter what time of the day it is what’s happening, she can just get there. In fact, she can’t really hold back. So we would say, oh, this is the first one. Just can you just, we want to just get a vocal volume balance, don’t sing fully. And she’s like, okay, and tape rolls. And she’s like [screams].

AD: She’s like, no, I’m already there. Don’t worry. Wow. I mean, that’s great. I feel like that energy comes across, but I do think that the sort of composed nature of the record as well is one of its strengths because it really does present a very compelling kind of arc, like the way a great long playing record can. And so I really feel like the stuff that you all were tapped into on that record, really that was a really powerful moment and such a cool statement from Yoko that, like I said, I think that will be, we’re going to think about that in the same sort of breath as records like Lulu and Blackstar by Lou Reed and David Bowie, these sort of later in life statements of just real great purpose. So I just wanted to thank you for chatting about all this stuff. It’s been beyond the pleasure. It’s always so great to encounter somebody who thinks about music with as much intelligence and imagination as you. So thank you so much for being with us.

Yuka Honda: Thank you so much. It was nice talking to you.

 

 
 Posted on April 30, 2025April 30, 2025Podcast Yuka Honda
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });