# Transmissions :: Chris Cohen

**Transmissions — Chris Cohen** · _2024-07-17_ · by Jason Woodbury · `podcast`
**Tags:** Chris Cohen, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2024/07/17/transmissions-chris-cohen/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://chriscohen.bandcamp.com/album/paint-a-room

## Body

Welcome back to Aquarium Drunkard Transmissions. This week on the program, we are pleased to welcome guest host Zara Hedderman and singer/songwriter Chris Cohen to the show to a generous, expansive, and genuine conversation. Cohen’s new record is called Paint a Room. His fourth solo album—perhaps you know his work with Deerhoof, The Curtains, Cryptacize, Ariel Pink, Cass Mccombs, and Weyes Blood and more—it finds Cohen pairing with musical heavyweights like Jeff Parker and Josh Johnson, laying a sheen of ‘70s breeziness over top of Cohen’s remarkable compositions. 

In this wide-ranging chat, they discuss the new album, years spent working in record stores, Transcendental Meditation, The Grateful Dead, and much more. It’s an open and tender conversation, full of funny moments and deep insight.

Transmissions :: Chris Cohen 

Transmissions is a part of the Talkhouse Podcast Network. Visit the Talkhouse for more interviews, fascinating reads, and podcasts. Next week on Transmissions? Daniel Bachman joins me for a talk about climate, culture, and art. Don’t miss it—until then, this Transmission is concluded. 

Aquarium Drunkard is supported by our subscribers. Head over and peruse our site, where you’ll find nearly 20 years of playlists, recommendations, reviews, interviews, podcasts, essays, and more. With your support, here’s to another decade. 



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Aquarium Drunkard: Something I’ve always loved about your music, and it comes across on your new record, Paint a Room, which is incredible, I’ve really enjoyed listening to it, is the instinctual and very intimate quality to your songwriting. You’ve been playing music since you were 3 years-old, starting out on the drums and then you played around with recording when you were around 10 years-old. It seems like music is something that’s essential to you and it’s something you’ve always naturally gravitated towards. With your last record, Chris Cohen, you mentioned how making that was a process of trying to discover why you make music or as a form of self-analysis. Since that record and now with the new one, what are some of the things that have been illuminated to you in that deeper search of why it is so integral to you? 

Chris Cohen: Well, I mean, I can never know it all about that. I don’t exactly know why music is so primary for me but it does seem to be. I’m always surprised, I’m learning not to be, but I remember for a long time being surprised that other people… I always just assumed that music is that important for everybody. And it’s always like, ‘Oh, wait, maybe I’m weirdly obsessed with it’ or something. I don’t know, I think a lot of people are but I guess what I’m trying to say is that I think it happened so early on for me that I’m not even sure I can analyze. What I could say is just that that’s what I was encouraged [to do]. It was the only thing I was encouraged to do, really. I mean, sadly, I kind of wished I was good at other things. 

It just became my way of being in the world. For me, it’s how I make friends and how I participate. There have been times where I didn’t play music. There was one year, I think I was probably about 24 or something, where I just didn’t play at all. I was working in a record store, I was still really into music, but I just didn’t play at all. I remember that year was so, so hard for me. If I’m not playing music, I don’t know who I am, you know? It’s very fundamental, I guess. [When I’m] working on music, it’s just a process of celebrating music. I make music where I try to combine different things that I like to make like a shrine to the music that I love. It’s sort of like paying respect to the people who came before you and the people you love; your friends, your heroes. It’s something that I renew all the time. I hope I can always play music. I guess the thing about making the music is trying to find a way to do it that feels like it’s something I can keep doing. Which feels sometimes, you know, I’m middle-aged now and the thought crosses my mind sometimes where I’m like, ‘How long can I keep doing this?’ Not just as a job, because it’s not even necessarily a job, but even just as a hobby. There might come times when I can’t do it and so I’m trying to figure out a way to find a practice that’s going to work in the long term. I think it’s a process of perfecting, or maybe not perfecting, but trying to get closer to something that feels like it has the longevity of something that I’m never gonna be able to pin down or  like a problem I can never solve, in a way. For it to be sort of something you can keep chasing forever, you know?

AD: I think about songs like “The Burl”or “Bummer With Cakes” that you recorded as The Curtains. They have an abstract style of playing and I mean this in the nicest possible way when I say that they remind me of the sounds from the early days of learning how to play guitar; figuring it out and generally enjoying the mode of self-expression in it. It’s like the musical equivalent of being a kid with a pencil or a crayon in your hand and you have fun scribbling freely on a piece of paper. What attracts you to that mode of abstraction and playing with a looseness? It’s not necessarily always present in your later work, but it was certainly part of The Curtains’ output. 

Chris Cohen: Yeah, I mean there’s so many ways of making music. I’m trying to remember what was my mindset back then about it. I mean, it’s sort of the same in a way, I just pretend like I have no idea what I’m doing. Or I try to forget where I am. It was easier to do back then. For instance, with The Curtains, I remember the first couple of shows we played, when we would be on stage, I was so nervous, and so inexperienced that I would just completely disassociate. I just would forget where I was in the song or I would forget how the song went. I mean, we were probably just under-practiced or I would be really nervous, but it was easy to get lost back then in a way that it’s not as easy now. I can still get pretty nervous and disassociate as well! 

When we were playing the songs, we were touring a bit and had played those songs quite a lot and I felt pretty, I guess playing them and writing them are two different things, so like when we were playing them I actually probably felt very confident. And, you know, we were just encouraging each other, me and Greg [Sauner] and Andrew [Maxwell] who were the other members of The Curtains at that time. I feel like we were really encouraging each other to just get freaky and really respond, or like really throw each other weird things to respond to. That was kind of the way that we played together. When I was writing that music, the writing of it was much more like what you’re talking about with a child scribbling on paper. I think I was trying to forget how to play guitar and just make up chords. I was looking for ugly chords on the guitar. It was almost like I wanted to, I’m not a Jazz musician,  I just love Jazz music, but I was trying to imitate or it was sort of my approximation of Jazz played completely wrong. There’s not actually that much improvisation and it’s not really based on Jazz history. It was just my own sort of a weird fake Jazz of making up chords that sounded jazzy to me. I was really trying to bring together a few different kinds of music that I was into. I wanted it to be sort of like Morton Feldman, I was really into space and the way that intervals could be thought of in a very open-ended sort of out-of-context different way of looking at intervals and stuff. 

And then, I really wanted to make something that was sort of like The Shaggs, who I was also really into. I think the idea of teaching yourself or making yourself do a kind of music that you’re not comfortable in, and this way of having so many layers like… The Shaggs would have a lot of layers where [when you’re listening to them] you’re thinking, ‘Well, why are they doing this? Who are they? Where did they learn to do this? What in the context of this music is so baffling?’ Those were things I was really into. I was also really into that band Harry Pussy. The early Curtains songs, especially, I wanted to do something that had that kind of pointillism and linear style. So, with the first Curtains [record] I almost didn’t really want it to have any chords, or very few chords and unison playing and just free tempo. That’s, I think, where that’s coming from. And I can’t say, I mean, it’s been 20 years, so now I’m just onto something else. But I still love all that music. I guess I just moved on to something that was not necessarily about trying to forget, like in a way that music was like trying to forget the basics of music that I had already learned. And now, it’s sort of more like, ‘Okay, I’m going to integrate my quote-unquote musicianship into what I’m doing as opposed to trying to negate it. I mean, not that there was even that much musicianship to negate at that time! But yeah, now I’m kind of more like, maybe more into flow or getting into a more complicated form, because with a lot of that stuff the form was very simple. 

AD: Calamity is the closest of those Curtains records that shares a similar personality with your solo work. I read that you had previously said how Calamity felt like your first solo record. I’d love to hear about the period between that record and Overgrown Path and the process of creating and honing your solo identity, especially having had such a varied musical trajectory up to that point. What was it  like for you to be out in front and center? 

Chris Cohen: Yeah, with Calamity, I do think of that as my first solo record. Actually, when I was recording Overgrown Path and when it was done, when I was sending it out to try to find a label, I thought it was going to be a Curtains record. I had just been used to using that name for whatever I was doing, where I was writing the most. I think there were maybe three different versions of The Curtains, so I had already been used to reinventing using that name. [With] Overgrown Path, I was just like, ‘Yeah, this is The Curtains’. And then it was only because Mike Sniper, the owner at Captured Tracks, was ready to put it out but said he wouldn’t put it out if it was going to be under The Curtains because he had a policy of only releasing stuff by artists who hadn’t put anything out before. So, his way around that was recommending that I use my name. 

He convinced me because he was like, ‘This way, everything you do will be under the same umbrella. If you collaborate with other people, it’s always Chris Cohen’. And I thought, ‘Yeah, that does make sense’ and that was when I finally agreed to that. [Captured Tracks] were the only label that wanted to put that record out, so it was like a non-choice, really. In my mind, those records are very similar in that they were like… so Calamity I recorded all the basics. It’s all me except for a couple guest vocalists and a trombone guest. That was John Ringhofer on trombone and Nedelle Torrisi and Yasi Perera sang on it, too. It was the same process, you know, but layering the instruments one by one and that’s pretty much been the way that I worked until, there’s one song on the self titled solo record, “Heavy Weather Sailing”, is the first one that I did with bandmates. This new record is much more of a band record. 

I guess just the transition of all that, like those six years in between [Calamity and Overgrown Path], I was doing Cryptacize, which was a project I had with Nedelle Torrisi. We were partners at the time and she joined The Curtains, the touring version of the band after Calamity came out. Then we started writing songs together and Nedelle is a great songwriter and I learned so much collaborating with her. There’s a lot of things that went into it, but one thing I would say is that she definitely pointed my songwriting in a certain direction in terms of developing melody. She taught me a lot about traditional song form that I really had never thought about. On Calamity, I don’t think I’d ever even considered the idea of like a verse or a chorus. I’d never read a book about songwriting or even talked about it. This wasn’t something in my peer group, at any time, did we ever talk about, like, ‘Oh, that’s the verse or that’s the chorus’. 

When I look back on that now, that is very telling, in a way, because when I was younger, when I was in college and in my 20s, I had basically decided, like I was not especially interested in being a songwriter, singing, playing, even composing I thought was kind of square! I was like, ‘I’m an improviser! I do free improvised music’. That was all I did for years and I was not that great at it, if I’m really honest. But that was my scene. Those are the people that I played music with. I was very shy about introducing the idea of saying to friends, ‘I’ve written this thing, can you do this with me?’. The Curtains was where I started making graphics scores, I think I still have some of them somewhere. 

That was the way I started writing songs. Now, I wrote songs when I was a teenager and it was just kind of a thing that I dropped. As young people do, I guess I just was very dogmatic about it. I felt like it was wrong for me to stop time and make edits and compose and then tell other people what to do. I just had this big hang-up about that because that was kind of something that was in the air in my social circle. It was all about Free-Jazz and out there music. I liked Captain Beefheart, which is incredibly composed,  structured music and he’s like the worst autocrat tyrant! But just as an example, it was sort of like a misunderstanding of that. Me and my friends, I guess we all maybe thought it was improvised for a while, we weren’t sure. It was then just  a gradual coming to terms with, ‘Okay, I guess this is really who I am. I’m not that good at improvising but if I can stop and figure something out; this is actually what I really enjoy doing. This is who I am’. So it was a process of gradually accepting that I was a songwriter and even a singer because I had really not thought of myself as a singer. Collaborating with Nedelle, you know, I started thinking, ‘Okay, I should learn about how everybody else thinks about song form’. I read a book by Jimmy Webb about songwriting, because I’m a huge Jimmy Webb fan, and then I started thinking, ‘Oh, what is that part? Is that a verse?’ and once you start identifying and putting names on this kind of thing  it starts changing your thinking about it a bit. I think that was a big part of the trajectory of my records, learning about song form. Obviously, I have a long way to go. I still don’t really understand how you make every song like when you start it, you’re just like, ‘How is this going to work? How do I get from point A to point B? How do I say something interesting that would bear, you know, repeating that or is fair to ask somebody to sit there and listen to you for four minutes or whatever’. So I would say that’s the sort of the transition, that’s the trajectory of these records. 

AD: That’s really interesting considering the warm Jazz inflection on Paint a Room with the lovely sax, flute and piano motifs and you worked with Jeff Parker and Josh Johnson to get that sound. You mentioned earlier the process of learning or feeling comfortable to play and to develop songs with other people. This record was different to other ones you’ve made because you had the demos and then you toured them and then recorded them when you got back. How did you find that experience and how early into the songwriting stage did you decide that this was the direction you wanted to go? 

Chris Cohen: I think over the past years of doing work as a producer on other people’s records and seeing how good it could be to just let people have their space in the music to bring a bit of themselves into it. After finishing my third solo record, I just felt so exhausted by the process of doing everything by myself. I just felt like I can’t keep doing this, I’ve said that every time I finish a record. My partner Kate, she can attest, I’m just like always like, ‘Oh, I’ll never do it that way again!’. I always promise myself. 

Then this time I was just like, ‘Well, I really see how this is how you can do it’. When working with other people, we hire people, we make demos, we go into a professional studio. So, it could be done. There’s no reason why I’ve had this DIY aesthetic for so many years about doing things myself and it has become a bit of a hindrance at times. There’s good things about it, for sure, but I had come to the decision well before even starting to write [Paint a Room]. For this record, I just was like, ‘I’m not going to do that anymore’. Also, I had bandmates that I had been playing with for quite a while, David Givhan, Jay Israelson and Josh da Costa, and I knew I wanted to work with them. I knew I wanted to record with them because I really felt our relationship was becoming something special that I wanted to preserve. And the songs just sounded great. The old songs sounded great to me on tour and I just loved that I didn’t have to write every single person’s part. There was a lot of trust developing between us. 

I decided that was what we were going to do and I started making demos. I was very careful not to finish the demos too much. I mean, there’s still quite a bit of me writing their parts, but there was a lot of room for them to improve [them] and they definitely really, really did. That was such a joy for me to do. I also had the feeling that there was going to be another layer on top, which was the arranging that Josh and Jeff did. The songs had a certain amount of space left so there were a lot of sections that, when we did them live, sometimes I would be like, ‘Okay, maybe I’ll noodle around on the guitar or J will improvise or David will improvise something’. There were spaces that were clearly where some arrangement would be layered on top of that. 

I had never done that before and looking back on it, I wish I had left more space, in a way!  I wish I had brought Josh in earlier in the process because the songs were almost completely recorded and pretty finished when he came in. I wonder, yeah, it could have been another whole other thing if you had more space. But, it was such a great experience for me. It was what I wanted to do. I mean, when I came to Hardly Art, what I was asking for was that I really just wanted a budget so that I can hire people and I wanted to make the kind of record that I’d been making for other artists. I wanted to do that for myself and I just needed help doing that. They were so great in making that possible. So shout out to Matt from Hardly Art and everybody at Sub Pop. 

AD: You mention just now how a lot of the songs even in their demo stage were close to being finished. “Physical Address” was released in 2020 as a stand alone single. The version of the song on the record is a bit more flourished and there are other elements that have been added to it from that initial recording. Was that a good example of how the songs had been kind of sounding before they entered the next stage of recording with the band? 

Chris Cohen: Yeah, so the demos that I made for the other songs, I was trying not to do what I did on “Physical Address”! That one had like a million overdubs. With that one, I was trying to just compensate for the fact that it was just me and doing what I would always do. But I didn’t even really have any acoustic instruments like drums and stuff. My partner and I had just moved into a tiny apartment and we moved basically the day the pandemic started. We moved into this apartment because it was going to be closer to my partner’s work, and then the pandemic came and she didn’t even have to go into work. We actually didn’t stay there very long, but the circumstance being in lockdown and not having a lot of space and not having a studio where I could actually make a lot of noise, with that song, I wanted to do something where everything’s totally direct; all the drums are drum machine and samples and stuff like that. I’d been building that one up quite a bit more than the demos that I made for the Paint a Room stuff which was much more sparse, but kind of similar. 

That was the first song I wrote for Paint of Room. The next one after that was “Damage”. Actually, the version of “Damage” that’s on the record, I should say, I did record it with the band and that version didn’t quite work out because I didn’t play guitar with them when they were tracking live and it was really too hard to add guitar to after the fact so I actually went back to the demo version and then just built that up from there. That’s sort of an example of how that worked, but it would be hard to imagine because it’s really full now. If you took off the horns, basically that’s like what the demos were like. “Damage” was probably the best sounding of all the demos, too. That one had more acoustic guitar and stuff like that. 

AD: “Damage” is  such a striking opening song. Each of your records open so strongly. From the moment I pressed play on Paint a Room, I was instantly sucked in. Also to hear what you’re singing about on it is so resonating right now, wherever you are in the world. Everywhere, there’s people with so much power who disregard the importance of community. I’d love to hear about your approach to the record’s lyrics. Even on “Sunever”, there’s a sense of reassurance in there that reminded me of moments on Overgrown Path where there would be traces of you in the songs where sometimes you might be talking to  the audience or specific people, but it also feels like you’re talking to and reassuring yourself in trying to get through the day-to-day of how difficult life can be. 

Chris Cohen: I wrote “Sunever” to reassure somebody in my life. I wanted to write a song that was a message to that person. “Damage”, in a way, I sort of think is the opposite. I don’t mean it to be reassuring. It’s the first time I tried to write a song that was trying to speak directly about something that is happening. What I see happening in the world. 

AD: Yeah, it’s the first time I felt that you’re looking out at the broader world. 

Chris Cohen: Yeah, you’re right. It is the first song that I’ve tried to write that was like that. I think in a way, I mean, I don’t know if this is true, but it almost seems like power itself is a disregard or it’s like a leveraging of valuing life differently. I guess you could say that is the first premise of the song; that life is precious. That was something I had been reading, it’s not my slogan that I invented, that came from Ruth Wilson Gilmore. I’ve been trying to educate myself about the history of living in a colonial place, being a person who, you know, my existence here in this country and the privileges that I have are based on genocide. 

I had never tried to write a song, I mean, first of all, I had not really educated myself and like a lot of people in the summer of 2020, I wrote [“Damage”], in the summer of 2020, and like a lot of people like me, I was shocked and had not educated myself very well. That summer, I started trying to get myself up to speed. I tend to write about the things that I’m reading about or whatever I’m thinking a lot about. I wanted to say something clearly. As you pointed out, I have not written very many songs that speak directly. I don’t think of myself as a strong words person. I think of myself as a music person, first, and then words come out of the music. I felt like I had this song and it’s a really sad song and it was pretty. I felt really proud of it. I thought maybe this is the best song I’ve ever written musically, in terms of it has a real chorus. 

I was just like, ‘Okay, what could I do with this song?’. My thought was that I want to say something that is going to be the hardest thing for people… or what’s the thing I really want to tell people? What would really matter? What will be the hardest thing for people to hear? I wanted to write a song that was pretty sad, hopefully catchy, but that has a message of saying that our system sucks and our system needs to be completely dismantled. And, what sucks about it is not just police killing people in the streets. It’s that, of course. But, it’s also people being killed slowly in a million different ways. Everywhere. From day one in the hospital like the song says. From day one, people are divided up and treated differently, taught about hierarchy and abused and  divided-up according to how much money they have, where they’re from, who they are, what they look like, etc. 

I hope I can write more songs like that. There’s obviously a lot more to say. And as you pointed out, that song is still relevant. It’s about Palestine. It’s about the U.S.. It’s about, you know, everywhere in the world. Unfortunately, that song has some relevance, I think, in most places in the world. I wanted to push that song to be the first single and the first song in the record because I felt like that was the most important song. Not to say that my other songs aren’t important, I guess just I always hope that music would convey a message of liberation and empowerment. I would hope that in some way it’s there in all my music. Experience has shown me that people, whatever I thought I was saying, I don’t know if it really is that clear. 

I hope that this song maybe could help. I’d like to write more songs like this, but I also just want to say that I hope that my music is… I do believe all art, everything is political. For example, the way that you arrange a band! I want my music to embody principles of liberation in every possible way. I’m sure I fail in some ways, in many ways, I’m sure. I want, even internally, in terms of form, I want every instrument to be important. I want each person playing the music to be able to express who they are. I’ve always wanted to make music, or try at least, where if you took one thing away, it would fall apart. Where every person is part of this entity that is sustaining that life somehow. 

AD: Like frequencies working together. 

Chris Cohen: Yeah, I mean, that’s what music is! I feel like music should be an embodiment of freedom and responsibility to each other. But anyway, I just wanted “Damage” to go a little further and I hope I can write more songs like that. But honestly, it was really hard for me because I felt like ‘Do I know enough about this?’. I don’t feel any authority to speak about abolition, it was more of a way of [trying] to work through my feelings about it. Writing those lyrics, I think helped me clarify some ideas about abolition. For example, in the second chorus, where I say, ‘Where the damage is done, this is the place for everyone’. I had really struggled finding the right words for that part. I went through a million different versions, but basically, I just shifted the words really slightly. But for a long time, it was like, ‘Now the damage is done,’ and it said, ‘There is a place for everyone’. 

For a long time, I was really worried that people would interpret that to mean something like everyone has their place. Like that person’s place is prison or something. I worried about how that would be interpreted. I’m just trying to give an example of how finding the words, exactly the right words, that made sense. I felt like I had to think through some of the actual problems of abolition in the process of writing these words, because, you know, find yourself… the programming that I’ve had as a white person in America comes through so many times and in so many things that I do. Even in writing the song, there were versions of it where I found just slight shifts of words and stuff where I guess it just helped me think through how abolition happens everywhere, and damage is done everywhere. Harm is the thing that we… So as I understand, I feel like critics of abolition always say, ‘Well, what do you do with, with, you know, the murderers or the rapists?’. In writing the song, I had to come to the point of being like, ‘Yeah, we are not going to get rid of harm. Harm is everywhere, humans are going to do harm. But it’s about how we hold each other accountable’. That is a job for everybody, we all have to be involved in that, we all do it together. Instead of delegating it to, for example, police and prisons to do all of our accountability, and, you know, that they do that for profit. We’re going to do this together everywhere, we all have to do it. Anyway, sorry, I’m just rambling on, but I’m just trying to give an example of how writing the song actually was sort of like, I just gave it to myself as like homework. This is going to be a way to try to figure out my ideas, my orientation towards the ideas of abolition, and just to the best of my abilities, which is limited. It’s a work in progress. 

AD: I was really enjoying a video on your social media of you recording the horn arrangements with Josh Johnson, Jonah Levine, and Cesar A Hernandez in a bedroom. At the end of that clip, it turns to you and there’s an outpour of joy from watching them play. It seems like Paint a Room was a very fun record, in that regard, to make. To have people around and to be excited by expanding your sound. I know that the self-titled record had some brass elements to it but there’s more of a focus on that in the new songs. Was it fun to play around with those textures?

Chris Cohen: Yeah, it was a real treat for me. Mostly just to hear, because Josh did all the arrangements remotely. I actually was not really a part of that so much. I gave him little bits of feedback but it was almost like I was just hearing it as a listener. Which, in many ways, it’s kind of ideal. I always am hoping that I’m going to get that sort of distance from what I’m doing, where I can hear it like how people would hear it. So, I was just hearing it like you would and it was a real treat to just sit back and let someone else see it through and Josh did it so beautifully. 

Jeff did it beautifully, as well. Jeff wrote the arrangement on “Damage” and Josh played on it. Then Josh did all the other arrangements. I should say, on my last solo record, it was a saxophone player named Kasey Knudsen, who lives in the Bay Area. She and Jay Israelson, the keyword player who played on both of those records, Kasey was improvising on, she plays on three of the songs and on two of them, she was improvising. Then the third one was an arrangement that she and Jay just made-up together. That was really fun, too. I was there recording it and just kind of sitting back. They did a beautiful job, too. So that was like my little taste of ‘Okay, this is what it could be like’. When you find people that you trust and you really love their aesthetic, it was an honor to be able to invite them into the song. 

AD: Something in the aforementioned clip of Josh, Jonah and Cesar playing the horn parts for “Damage” on your social media is that I noticed that Cesar A. Hernandez is wearing a Sonic Youth Goo t-shirt. Maybe eagle-eyed Chris Cohen fans will have spotted that and known that you were the protagonist in their music video for “Cinderella’s Big Score”. 

Chris Cohen: Right! Wow, I never even thought of that. 

AD: I was watching the video recently with the knowledge that it’s you. What was that experience like and how did it come about? 

Chris Cohen: I was playing music with this guy Dan Janisch, a great LA songwriter. This is when I was 15. I think I was 15 because I remember my mom and my dad giving me a lift to Hollywood, to Dave Markey’s house, he directed the video. So, my friend Dan said that these guys needed a kid to play like a runaway street hustler. I think I was just the only kid that they had access to, honestly! Or like maybe they liked, I mean, I would have had the grunge look going then, they might have thought that was funny. I don’t know! We shot it over a couple days and it was super low budget, I don’t think they paid me anything. When you see it now, and Sonic Youth, you know, they’re this iconic thing now, but back then it was, you know, they were not of that status. I don’t know that there was much of a budget, I mean, it was all shot on Super 8. They were nice enough to invite me  to go backstage at their Whiskey A Go-Go show on that tour, which was really awesome. 

But yeah, it was like three days and it was during the Gulf War, actually. So a lot of that footage was shot at this protest at UCLA. They bought me a hamburger and put it in a trash can and then they were like,  ‘okay, go get the hamburger out of the trash can!’. There’s a lot of old LA punks acting in that video. There was Bill Bartell from White Flag, he was the cop who roughs me up. My friend Dan Janisch was in it. I think Janet Housden was in it, she was the original drummer of Redd Kross who’s on Born Innocent. She was in lots of other bands, too. She and Dan, and I played bass in this band and we had one practice but we were called Electric Cat Box. I don’t know what happened to that band, but I was just a kid that they let hang out with and they brought me along. They were really, really sweet. The coolest adults and role models. I have to say, I still feel like those are the coolest people I’ll ever meet. They were my role models of what it could be like to be a cool adult! Dave Markey was living in this apartment, in like a back house or something, off of Melrose, and getting to go over to his house, he played me The Shaggs. That was the first time I’d ever heard The Shaggs. I just was in awe of these cool legendary LA musicians. It was a great experience. 

AD: You’re also a Deadhead, I believe? Or at least were in your teens? 

Chris Cohen: When I was actually at that age, I think that that was probably right as I was starting to get a little bit embarrassed about liking The Grateful Dead. But the two years before that, I was so hardcore. I saw The Dead a bazillion times. I remember counting the number of times, and it sounds crazy, but I probably went to almost 100 shows or something. Between 50 and 100 shows, I don’t know. I was really nuts [for them], I guess I had the money to spend and I would buy a ticket. If they were playing five nights, I would go five nights. I would go every single night. I was totally obsessed and I would bring a tape recorder and go in the taper section and record. I was really into trading tapes and I was super nerdy about it. 

I guess to identify as a Deadhead now, I feel like I would be sort of lying if I said that, because I haven’t seen them since Jerry [Garcia] was alive. I don’t listen to them a lot now, but I do still love them. I should credit Cass McCombs, he kind of got me back into The Dead. It was probably around the time of that Sonic Youth video, when I started to feel like it’s not cool to be a Deadhead. I guess I would just say that back then it’s so different than it is now. Nowadays, you can like the Grateful Dead and like anything else you want. But back then it was, or at least in my mind, and I think in many people’s minds, people were much more compartmentalized with their tastes. When I went to college, I wanted to make friends with people who I thought were cool music people that I thought I had something in common with, our tastes might coalesce around like punk, for example. But the fact that I had long hair and I was also into The Dead meant I was not cool! I started to get the sense that this long hair is really holding me back socially! That’s what it was like in the early and mid-90s. At least at my college, in my little world, it was really close minded. And sadly, I chopped off my hair and just disavowed my love of the Grateful Dead. But Cass McCombs was my first Deadhead buddy that I could be like, ‘Okay, I can get back into The Dead’. Maybe help me re-embrace The Dead. 

The thing about The Dead is that there’s something for everyone. It’s sort of like  Star Trek. There’s an entry point for almost everyone. Although not everyone, you know, I know not everyone loves The Dead. For me, I got into The Dead because I used to listen to classic rock radio stations when I was really young. “Casey Jones” and “St. Stephen”, those two songs would get played on the radio and whenever they would come on, I’d be like, ‘What is this? I like this’. I was so shocked when I realized that it was the Grateful Dead, because in my mind I thought they sounded totally different. I didn’t realize that they could sound like, you know, a Country band, or they could sound like Acid Rock. I was really into Jimi Hendrix and that late ‘60s electric stuff was really right up my alley. 

My parents had Workingman’s Dead on vinyl, so I was just like, ‘Oh, “Casey Jones”. They have that record!’.  I started listening to it and I was like, ‘I love this!’. I didn’t have any friends that like The Dead and I didn’t even really know about Deadhead stuff. It was just sort of gradually, the way that you piece things together back then. It was like, ‘Oh, well, my friend’s older brother, he’s a Deadhead’ and the way that you learned about things was so intoxicating, just the little bits of information that you gathered. Then it was like, ‘Oh, The Dead are coming to LA’ and so me and my friend went and we, you know, were discovering drugs and everything. It just became its own world that for like two years, I listened to almost no other music, just because there was so much to listen to. I listened to the Grateful Dead and listened to The Meat Puppets. Those are my two, I was just obsessed with those two bands. 

The other thing was that the Grateful Dead also provided an entry point to improvisation for me. I was into Jazz before The Dead. The Dead was the first improvisation that I felt was something I could do  because like The Dead are not that good necessarily. They’re just going for it. They felt free to make their own crude version of… They made-up their own kind of music. I mean, love it or hate it, it’s completely original or okay, sorry, not completely original, but it’s self-invented itself. It’s like an emergent anarchic. kind of music that just happened of its own freewill. I think that that embodied a lot of the punk ethos, I recognized it when I started getting into The Dead. I was like, ‘Oh yeah, these people are just fucking around! They have no idea what they’re doing and sometimes they’re terrible, but sometimes they’re great’. The whole thing was really formative for me in terms of DIY music in a way, as ridiculous as that sounds now, because when you look at The Dead, it’s just this horrible corporation. It’s like Disneyland, it’s ridiculous. But, you know, that wasn’t how they started so it’s the beginning part that I’m really interested in. 

AD: Finally, you mentioned earlier how the books you’re reading inspire the songs you want to make. What have been some books you’ve been spending time with recently? 

Chris Cohen: Yeah. What have I been reading? I’m currently reading Rashid Khalidi’s The Hundred Years’ War on Palestine. I’m reading the Tony Iommi autobiography called Iron Man, which is awesome. I just finished reading, this is another music book, it’s about San Francisco Post-Punk that’s called Who Cares Anyway. What else? Oh, I just read, I’m sorry, I’m just going on music biographies, but I just read Robin D.G. Kelly’s Thelonious Monk biography, which was so excellent. That’s the one I would recommend the most out of all of the music books. I love reading about musicians and like the minutiae of their touring and just their lives and stuff. That one, I just love. It was so well researched and then contextualized with the historical background mixed with the research. Robin D.G. Kelly is such a deep thinker about music, among so many other things, but the way that he talks about it. I learned so much not just about music and not just about Monk, yeah I love that book. 

What else was I reading? Actually, when I was writing the songs on my new record, I was really reading a lot of stuff from this anthology of poetry called Technicians of the Sacred, which was edited by the poet Jerome Rothenberg. That was something that was recommended to me by Che Chen from 75 Dollar Bill and my friend Yasi Pereira was reading it, too. It’s a collection of poetry from all over the world and all over history that is not necessarily included in the canon of poetry, like ancient texts or songs. I was trying to get myself inspired to write lyrics whilst reading that. I always read Bernadette Mayer poetry to get myself excited about words. What else? Sorry, I’m giving you probably too much! I’m just looking at my bookshelf. I was reading Dion Fortune, she’s a British, like early 20th century, occult person. She started her own secret society. I don’t know that much about her, but she wrote a lot of  “How to”occult books, but then she also wrote a fiction that I really love, there’s a series of stories of this character, Dr. Taverner. Who’s sort of like Sherlock Holmes, but of the psychic world. He solves psychic mysteries! Basically, people have these problems and he figures out the psychic source of their distress. What else have I got? I was reading some sci-fi, too. Oh, you know, I was also reading an anthology called Reclaiming Judaism from Zionism. It’s a book that Jewish Voice For Peace is involved with and it’s a bunch of accounts of people’s history with Zionism and how they extricated themselves. I was just trying to learn about the history of Zionism. Anyway, I’d say that’s probably a lot more than you need!  

 

 
 Posted on July 17, 2024July 16, 2024Chris Cohen Podcast
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });