# Transmissions :: Gary Lachman

**Transmissions — Gary Lachman** · _2025-11-12_ · by Jason Woodbury · `podcast`
**Tags:** Gary Lachman, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/11/12/transmissions-gary-lachman/)

## Body

This week, we present a conversation with writer, rock & roller, and esoteric scholar Gary Lachman, author of a new memoir, ⁠Touched By the Presence: From Blondie’s Bowery and Rock and Roll to Magic and the Occult.⁠ In it, Lachman charts his journey from a young New Jersey misfit immersed in comic books and paperback fiction to his days playing bass in Blondie as the band rose to stardom from the New York City punk underground. Blondie would go on to have a top-ten hit with his composition, “(I’m Always Touched by Your) Presence, Dear” penned about telepathic communication he experienced with this then girlfriend, the film actress and rock writer Lisa Jane Persky. 

Transmissions :: Gary Lachman

From there, the book details his days with Iggy Pop, fronting his own band, The Know, and eventually, his immersion in consciousness studies and the occult, which has informed the dozens of books he’s written since, including The Return of Holy Russia, Maurice Nicoll: Forgotten Teacher of The Fourth Way, Dark Star Rising, and Beyond the Robot: The Life and Work of Colin Wilson, written about his mentor and primary esoteric inspiration. 

Touched by the Presence is available now from Inner Traditions, and it was a treat to join Lachman to talk about the consciousness altering power of comic books, his time with Blondie and Iggy, and glean a little of his humor-filled and lowkey wisdom.

Transmissions is created in partnership with the Talkhouse Podcast Network. We’re brought to you by ⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠Aquarium Drunkard⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠, an independent music media crew headed by Justin Gage. Over at Aquarium Drunkard, you’ll gain access to 20 years of music writing, playlist, essays, mixtapes, radio special, podcasts, videos and more.



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Gary Lachman: Hey, there we go.

Aquarium Drunkard: Hey there Gary. How are you?

Gary Lachman: I’m fine. How are you doing, Jason?

AD: I’m doing great. Thank you for taking the time to do this. I appreciate it.

Gary Lachman: My pleasure.

AD: You’re in London, right?

Gary Lachman: Yeah, yeah. Whereabouts are you? Sorry, I don’t remember if I know already.

AD: No, it’s okay. I don’t know if you do. You’re speaking to me from Phoenix, Arizona.

Gary Lachman: You’re in Arizona. Okay, right.

AD: Yeah. Aquarium Drunkard is Los Angeles-based, but I am here in the “far suburbs of LA.” I guess that’s one way to think about it. [Laughs] 

Gary Lachman: Are you anywhere near Tempe?

AD: Oh, yeah. I’m very close to Tempe. I lived in Tempe for many years actually.

Gary Lachman: I just know it because I played there once when I was a musician, ages ago, when I was playing with Iggy Pop.

AD: Oh, gosh. 

Gary Lachman: Would’ve been 1981 so I have no idea where it would’ve been.

AD: Tempe has a few notable shows. I think there’s a U2 live album that was recorded in part in Tempe at the stadium there. I spent a lot of time in Tempe growing up. That’s where my grandparents lived and we’d spend a lot of time there. Yeah. And then moved to Tempe when I left the smaller town that I spent most of my time in. Tempe is a cool spot.

Gary Lachman: Well, I’ll have to go back someday if I go back to the United States, if there is a United States to go back to, but let’s not go in that direction.

AD: No. Otherwise, we’ll be completely subsumed by the dystopic dread.

Gary Lachman: Yes, absolutely.

AD: There’s a fair amount of bookshops and stuff as well as musical things. Do you ever still play anymore? 

Gary Lachman: Well, not really, but strangely enough, over the past couple years, I’ve done some shows with a Blondie tribute band here in the UK.

AD: Oh, that’s fun.

Gary Lachman: I mean, I got to know them through Clem Burke, the late Clem Burke, who passed away earlier this year, and he did a whole tour with them. They’re called Bootleg Blondie, so it was Blondie’s drummer backed up by a Blondie tribute band. So I went to one of the shows and I met the two, the Chris and Debbie. Debbie, the singer, and Andy the guitarist. And then I went to see Blondie proper play, and I was sitting next to the tribute people, and then they kept asking me, do you want to do that again? They talked me into doing a couple shows.

I hadn’t played in years. This was about three years ago, but then this year, I’ve done a couple already for them, sort of a little tribute. I just go up and do a couple of tunes with them. I’m doing one this next month on Clem’s birthday. There’s a pub here called The Half Moon that’s got a history going back to the ‘60s, so I’m going to be doing a couple tunes there.

AD: Our condolences on the passing of your friend Clem. He has appeared on this podcast in the past and was a great person to speak with. I spoke with him when the Numero Group Blondie box set came out, which was a beautiful package and it was a lot of fun to speak with him. And of course, you came up in that podcast: He said, these days, he’s better known for his books on esoterica than he is for being like a rock & roller. Obviously this book Touched by the Presence, tells how that came to be essentially, it shares your origin story in that regard. So I’m glad that we’ll have the opportunity to follow up that conversation with Clem with this one with you. Thank you for taking the time.

Gary Lachman: Alright, my pleasure.

AD: Well, I really enjoyed this book. It was extremely fun to read, but in the afterword you write, “This memoir was written during an extremely difficult time in my life, quite literally, to keep me sane.” I was a little surprised because it is such an enjoyable read and I think shot through with a lot of humor and poetry and insight. I feel like in the book you talk a little bit about how you have entertained a lot of gnostic thoughts over your years, and I was reminded of, I think you’ll know better than me, but I think in the gospel of Thomas, Jesus says, “if you bring forth what is within you, it will save you. And if you don’t, it will destroy you.” I wonder if Touched by the Presence resonates with that line at all in terms of its place in your writing life.

Gary Lachman: Oh, well, certainly. I do quote it in the book, and there’s part of the book where finally whatever was needed to come out came out, quite drastically. But that’s the complete breakdown of my life in Los Angeles in 1995, just prior to my coming here at the beginning of 1996. Which, incidentally, this January coming up, it’ll be, gods willing, the 30th anniversary of that shift. 

AD: Wow, yeah.

Gary Lachman: But no, in a way, that’s what the book is about. The subtitle is “how I went from playing in Blondie to writing books about magic and the occult,” which is, yeah, that’s the story. But it goes back earlier. It goes back to my childhood and things like comic books. It’s mostly books and what other forms of culture and music had this impact on me that over time, led to my becoming a musician actually, quite strangely, because I wasn’t really a musician at the time, becoming a professional musician nonetheless, and getting into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame, all that kind of stuff. 

And then later on spending 10 years after that ended to the very beginning of just starting to write. So it is that kind of story of having whatever was in me to come out, which is not always an easy process. And if it’s something that’s real, if you have a real creative drive, it will come out. But as happens often, if you don’t do it consciously in some way, if you don’t create the situations or make the choices that you need to make in order to change your life, to have what is in you come out, it’ll come out anyway and it’ll change your life for you.

AD: Right. Yeah, it’s fascinating. You talk about, and we can start a little bit with the fact that you were in Blondie or in the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame because of that, but you talk about when you were drafted, they had just lost their bass player and you wrote, I didn’t have a bass guitar, but one was there. So that’s helpful. You didn’t even have a bass though, and you said your technique was primitive at best, more or less, one finger roaming up and down the neck, but I was young, thin, and wore dark glasses. The fact that I could barely play was negligible. I think that’s a pretty beautiful encapsulation of that moment in pop history where enthusiasm and knowledge of what was cool. Those were things that could get you by, even if you lacked certain technique or whatever. When you look back on that moment, it seems like that was a real shift in the way people thought, maybe about even rock and roll music, as kind of primitive and crude as it was considered at the time.

Gary Lachman: There’s a kind of backstory to this, which if you look at the early ‘70s, I was still in high school with bands like Sha Na Na, who were doing all the old doo-wop ‘50s numbers, and then people like Chuck Berry and Little Richard and Jerry Lee Lewis and some of the figures from that time were making a comeback, and there was this kind of, “let’s get back to the roots of rock and roll,”  nostalgia for the roots. And in a way, it’s only 15 years. It’s not like, 50 years ago, there’s this early nostalgia for it. Even John Lennon was doing covers of old tunes like that. 

And then what was happening in New York…there was this energy, but with that New York, beatnik even sensibility with the poetry with Patti Smith and Richard Hell and Tom Verlaine.  They started out as poets and then dud Television together. It wasn’t that far distant from watching people learn how to play on stage or learn how to develop who they were. They weren’t slick. That’s the whole thing. It wasn’t like this slick stuff. It wasn’t like stuff that you would see at the mainstream rock clubs, which was just kind of at this point MOR sort of stuff. But what was to me absolutely fascinating was to see bands like Television in the early days and the stuff they were doing and they were writing it themselves. 

I say I wasn’t a musician, but I hung out with lots of musicians in Jersey where I grew up. Well, Clem and I, that’s where we knew each other from, from high school in Bayonne, New Jersey, and there were all these great guitarists and bass players and keyboardists and drummers and all that. I hung around on the fringe and picked up a chord here or two, but they were really virtuosi. When it came to me, I knew I’d would never play like that, but I wanted to get something out of the guitar, so give me those three chords and I could start to put them together. 

I had absorbed all this great music when I was a kid in the 1960s growing up, hearing The Beatles on AM radio, where they play these one great two-minute, two-and-a-half minute songs after the other, whether it was the British invasion or The Supremes or Motown or The Byrds or whatever. And I just absorbed all that. I instinctively learned how to put whatever chords together.

So my songs tended to have that kind of ‘60s homage feel, which was very different than what was happening in the UK. In the UK, The Sex Pistols hated The Beatles, they hated Pink Floyd, hated all that stuff. But Patti Smith does “My Generation” and stuff like that; she was doing a Who tune. Blondie turned into, more or less, a kind of ‘60s retro band or homage band in the very first album and all that. So it was a very different feel to it. But yeah, no, that was an absolutely remarkable time for me. And even writing the book, I mean, if you ever want to bring back memories of some past time, write down your memories of it, write down your memoirs of it, because the smells and the taste and everything come back. So I even could feel like I was back in CBGB at that time again when I first was there. And seeing bands like Patti Smith and Television.

AD: I remember for me, getting into punk rock was something that happened when I was in high school. This is the early 2000s, so past its moment culturally, but we were, I don’t know, floating on those vapors to a certain degree. There was contemporary punk rock, and that’s actually what I got into. But I immediately started working my way back. And I was always struck by that distinction that you articulated there, which is that over in the UK, they seem to have this idea, “no future, we’re cutting off the idea of the past.” This notion that we’re going to invent a new thing. Obviously The Sex Pistols still sound like a garage rock band, you know what I mean? Even though they hated the established notion of rock & roll. But when I think about the New York bands, even as a young burgeoning listener, it struck me as odd that Blondie and Patti Smith and Television and The Ramones were somehow the same genre, because as a kid, it all sounded pretty different to me. And Blondie immediately had that very hooky pop sensibility that The Ramones had in a different way. But anyway, so yeah, I think that it’s fascinating.

Gary Lachman: The funny thing about the Ramones is they said they wanted to be like The Bay City Rollers. So punk was just like some name just because they wore the jeans, but nothing to do with the kind of the quasi. But I think the thing you’re going to say here about the no future, that goes back to Malcolm McLaren and his Situationist/Futurist [sensibilities]. So it’s all this political street theater, but I think they were doing real music in New York.

AD: I grew up hearing [Blondie]. Those are probably some of the first songs I remember hearing because they were on the radio. There was a kitsch to Blondie that was so attractive to me, a pop exuberance that it felt comic book-y in a weird way. I wasn’t surprised to read you write about watching the Batman show starring Adam West. Because I always picked up on a little of that. There’s just a sense of fun that made it feel subversive, but also strangely welcoming. Blondie had an allure that felt rooted in that kind of expression of pop culture exuberance, and it was really fun to go back and get a sense of that from these first person recollections of that time.

Gary Lachman: Well, I mean, if you look at the cover, there’s a shot, I think it’s upper left hand corner, of Debbie and I. She has a Batman t-shirt on. And it’s like the old comic book Batman t-shirt, so it was before any of the films came out. But even in the early days, I mean, Debbie came out of this kind of shtick, campy stuff, the glitter period with The Dolls and Stilettos. That’s the first time I ever saw Chris and Debbie when I saw a New York Dolls show at this infamous drag club called Club 82, and Stilettos are opening for them, but they had that kind of campy schtick kind of thing. So we did a lot of that at CBGB on stage. This fellow who rented us our floor, the Blondie loft, which is just a block and a half away from CBGB, he was an artist, and he did these canvases of kind of monsters that Debbie would karate during the song of ours called “Kung Fu Girls” and things like that. I remember, I forget which song it was, she came out holding a fish bowl with the goldfish in it and stuff, it had that pop fun feeling. It was upbeat, and Chris was the comic books and Japanese monster movies. Now, with Godzilla, it’s like PhD thesis

AD: Yeah, it’s true.

Gary Lachman: It’s just so weird. But in any case, it was just part of our life’s blood. We rolled into that kind stuff.

AD: Yeah, I loved that, I mean, I’m a huge fan of writing about comics as well. I realized what a huge impression the world of comics made on you as a young person. You talk about the Marvel books, the DC books, the Silver Age at large, sharing beautiful thoughts about really seminal artists, people like Carmine Infantino or Jack Kirby. You write, “Comic books then introduced me to a world rather different than the one I knew, a much wider, deeper, more interesting world in which anything was possible.” I thought that was just an incredible encapsulation of the effect of the comic book medium, which wasn’t new when you were a kid, it had been around, but was reaching new heights in terms of its narrative and storytelling capabilities. So I guess I’m curious, before I ask you a little bit about that, did you keep up with comics as the ‘80s and ‘90s went on?

Gary Lachman: Yeah, no, I didn’t. I mean, I’m pretty much of that time. Well, for a patch in the 2000s, when my sons were young boys, I indoctrinated them into the DC Comics world by watching the Cartoon Network series of the Justice League. I dunno if you ever saw those.

AD: It’s quite good, yeah. 

Gary Lachman: They’re the best things ever made with that. They made me feel like it was somehow the comics, they were that color. So whenever that was, for a few years in the 2000s, they became mad about collecting all the action figures, and we would go to Forbidden Planet. There used to be one in New York, and I don’t if there’s still there, but there’s a famous comic shop here in the West End. I actually have a few boxes of those action figures. I don’t know if they’re worth anything now. They’re about 20 years old. They’re in a closet here. I haven’t taken them out in years. 

But no, for that patch I did. I was born in ‘55, so I tell the story of how I must’ve been reading at five or even earlier, because I can remember when comics went from 10 cents to 12 cents, and it was The Flash. You mentioned Carmen Infantino, and I badgered my grandmother to give me 10 cents to go get a comic. And when I got to the shop, I picked up a copy of The Flash, and the guy said, no, no, it’s 12 cents now. And I had to go back and get another 2 cents, which was difficult.

AD: I mean, yeah.

Gary Lachman: And then I got the comic. So that would’ve been November, 1961. I would’ve been still five, because Christmas Eve is my birthday. Comics were this other world for me. I knew nothing better to do on a Saturday when I didn’t have to go to school. It was like, just get a stack of whoever it was. Oh, okay. I’ll read through all my Spider-Man. Oh, no, let’s read through all The Avengers. I was a DC [fan] because most of us my age were. And then I discovered Marvel at about the age of eight and The Fantastic Four, and that’s when I first came across Kirby’s work or knew who it was. And that was just like, wow, this is so totally different than the DC comics.

AD: That difference was apparent to you as a fan and as a reader, it really did scan as a different style?

Gary Lachman: Oh, yeah. It was a whole different, when you think about it, it takes place in New York. It’s not in Metropolis or Gotham City. So it’s “real life.” And also they would make references to things like James Bond movies or something like that, or I remember first hearing about the Tolkien books from seeing “Frodo Lives” in Marvel comics. That was a link to later on when I started reading what was called adult fantasy at the time. But no, I mean, I joined the Merry Marvel Marching Society, I sent my dollar away. I mean an actual dollar in the mail. And I wish I had the things, but please, please don’t make me think of this stuff. I have this Proustian kind of ache, all this stuff I used to have, and I can’t even go into when my sons were younger, we went to all these different comic shops that I would see on the wall hanging all these copies that I had and stuff like that. 

AD: Hanging for a pretty penny, obviously.

Gary Lachman: I tell one sad story when I was transitioning from living at home and living in New York and starting my life of crime as it were, and selling off bit by bit my collection, to some guy who knew he was getting a great deal on First Avenue and Houston Street in New York in 1974. [Comics] had a tremendous impact on me. And again, also in the way that at first, I think I became interested in history. I think I became interested in the past because I became fascinated with the comics that were in what’s [considered] The Golden Age. So in the late ‘30s into the ‘40s, before the slump after World War II, and in the back of the comics I was getting, there was these ads for these catalogs for people who had old issues and all that. And I used to love getting those catalogs. It was all the Blue Beetle or Doll Man, or all these figures you never heard of. I didn’t. And I just became, so it was like, I guess today, I wonder if this would be called “hauntology” today. I don’t know if that term has reached over somehow. It’s something about, it’s the immediate past, not like the past past, but it’s the immediate past that lingers on in some way. But I thought, as I say in the book, this is something strikes me as phenomena of pop culture in the sixties. A lot of it was pop culture from earlier generations, especially the thirties or forties. Films like the Marx Brothers were repackaged in certain ways, WC Fields, and even in comics, Captain America, who was a ‘40s character, who was reinvented and all that. So many in the Marvel characters were, The Submariner, the Torch. I’m glad you picked up on this. It was a lot of fun for me to write about that. And I wondered, oh, maybe this is too much about this stuff, but I just found it fascinating.

AD: I think why I am drawn to it because of my own personal proclivities, as is the case with a great amount of this book to be honest. But I also think that there is something interesting about how, even when I would get my hands on comic books, this is a pre-digital era that I’m talking about, but as a kid, you would get an issue and you might not understand what’s going on fully because there were issues that preceded it that you weren’t reading. When I look back on some of the way that comics shaped my burgeoning consciousness, I think about how they made me feel okay about that a little bit, this idea of just getting dropped into it, In a weird way that almost made the worlds that they portrayed feel that much more real, because I got the sense that there was history that just didn’t know yet. It instilled in me the kind of curiosity to work backwards that immediately as I started to get more serious about music, that same [instinct to] dig back and find the roots of things, that same instinct was well-suited to just applying it to a different medium now, records or whatever. So I think about that.

Gary Lachman: Did you try to get the back issues so you could find out the story?

AD: Oh, yeah. I would to yard sales or things like that and just dig through boxes. I seemed to have—I’m sure that you feel this way too—a sort of weird sense. There were two Circle Ks in the town I grew up in, and I knew which one of them would stock comics at any given time. You know what I mean? And so it would be like, I’m cruising over there. I wouldn’t know what I was going to get, because I’m sure that they ordered along the lines of, give us 12 comic books. They didn’t care what they were.

Gary Lachman: Yeah.

AD: I would dig through stuff. And similar to what you’re describing, even if I didn’t know the characters, sometimes just the cover was enough to draw me in. So I think it instilled a lot of things that carry over into the musical world too.

Gary Lachman: If you get interested in something, it’s sort of like, “Well, how did it arrive where it it?” 

AD: Yeah, exactly.

Gary Lachman: I tend to be obsessive about things, tracking down whatever, everything that’s about them and find out all about them and that kind of thing. And again, that’s one of the things, I don’t know where I got that from because nobody else in my family was like that, and I didn’t know anyone in my immediate family that read or had any kind of interest in this sort of stuff at all. So I just wonder where that, I did one of these Ancestry DNA tests, but 60 percent of the genes I have apparently came from, well, a part of the world that’s in the news, the Ukraine, Poland. And I just wondered, well, and the other, that’s like the Irish and a bit of German, and I’m talking where did all this weird kind of reading all the time, wanting to know everything about everything all the time, where did all that come from? So I don’t know, maybe I’m a changeling. I don’t know.

AD: I could probably talk to you just about comic books for an hour. [Laughs] But I have questions about tother topics too, but you also talk about, alongside comic books, getting into weird fiction. You’re getting into fantasy, you talk about Edgar Rice Burroughs, Lovecraft Algernon Blackwood. But I just have to cite one figure from that section as a similar preoccupation of mine, which is the painter Frank Frazetta. And I thought to myself, “Boy, I’m sure that somebody along the lines could have said, ‘I don’t know how much you need to write about Frank Frazetta in this book,’” but I’m really glad that you did, because he rules. In terms of shaping the contours of imagination, I can’t think about A Princess of Mars without thinking about his paintings. You know what I mean? And they really do have an allure, especially to, I guess, shall we say, freshly pubescent boys maybe?

Gary Lachman: Are you kidding? Absolutely. Oh my God. This makes it difficult for me whenever I go on dating sites, my criteria for scantily clad, incredibly buxom women that always managed to wind up in some provocative pose while the super strong barbarian is killing the wizard or the dragon or something. No, it was just incredible. I think Frazetta, the first ones that come to mind are Conan book, a guilty pleasure. These paperbacks that came out in the 1960s, the Lancer put them out. Pulp was like in the ‘30s and ‘40s, and then paperbacks were kind of the pulp of the ‘50s, ‘60s, and so on into the’70s. 

There was this company called Ace, actually, they were the ones who first published Lord of the Rings, but they published an unauthorized edition because Tolkien’s publishers couldn’t bother to get the copyright secured in the United States. So it was open and that it was a big hit on the campuses. It became a campus bestseller, like with Herman Hesse and Vonnegut and people like that. But then they had these wonderful, they called ’em “Ace Science Fiction Classics,” and they were like 40 cents rather than 50 cents, and they were slightly smaller than the main paperbacks, but a lot of them had these wonderful Frazetta covers, the Burroughs Princess of Mars, Tarzan books and all that. And I say, I didn’t grow up in nature, I grew up in television. I grew up with television and books—paperbacks, radio. I didn’t discover nature until I moved to California in the 1980s.

AD: You were a couple decades into it already. Yeah. That’s fascinating. You write about, the book is named, it’s a reference to the incredible song that you wrote for Blondie, “(I’m Always Touched by Your) Presence, Dear.” And a few years ago, we taped an episode of this podcast with the great esoteric writer, Matt Marble, discussing Arthur Russell, and we taped that at the Philosophical Research Society in LA. And afterwards, the ultra-cool Lisa Jane Persky came up and introduced herself, and I felt as if I were in the presence of rock and roll royalty. She’s so cool. And you write about your early romance with her, and I mean, it’s just so fun to read, right? We’re talking occult jewelry and movies and Barry Windsor-Smith prints and all of that. But you also talk about, in addition to this romance, or maybe because of the romance, strange things started to happen, You felt basically connected psychically, if that’s the only way to put it. 

Gary Lachman: Oh yeah, yeah.

AD: So I’m curious, how interested are you in the concept of telepathy and you being such follower and a brilliant thinker about people like Colin Wilson? I’m just curious, what do you think that is?

Gary Lachman: Well, I mean, first off, I would say I think it’s real. And I also think if you bother, you can get all the boring statistics, so the statistics in variety of different experiments and variety of different laboratory conditions. Were they about anything else, no one would bat an eye about it, but that they’re about either some precognition or telepathy or some other parapsychological, paranormal thing. This is where some people say, oh, no, it can’t be that. But I mean, statistically it’s there. Actually, strangely enough, just this past weekend I just was in Oxford, I was invited to give the after dinner talk at the annual conference of the Society for Psychical Research. And my subject was precognitive dreams, because I’ve written a book about precognitive dreams. It came out a few years back. 

This is during the first COVID lockdown here, but my preoccupation with dreams started exactly what you were just talking about with Lisa, and led to that song. When Blondie, when we were on our first North American tour and we were opening for Iggy Pop, Iggy had been revived by David Bowie, and Bowie was actually playing Iggy’s band, but it was incognito, and this was before social media, mobile phones or anything like that. So it was all word of mouth that it was getting around, that Bowie was in the band. But what was happening was, whenever I wanted to call Lisa back in New York, or she was going to call me, because she had a list of the hotels we’d be at, and when we’d be there, it would be as if I was about to pick up the phone, but it rang and it was her or vice versa. And then we’d talk about her dreams and they would be very, very similar. 

I can’t remember now what the content of the dreams were. I didn’t write them down, but this was something that happened. And then at that time, I had become very, very interested in all this sort of stuff and in all of this kinds of things that I’ve subsequently, many years later went on to, well, more or less have a career in. And so far as I have one writing about this stuff [topics like] magic, the occult, paranormal, consciousness. And after the end of that tour and before we went on the next tour we went on, to the UK, the first UK tour in ‘77. I wrote the song, “(I’m Always Touched by Your) Presence, Dear,” which was about this connection between the two of us. So my first attempt at writing about any of this sort of thing was a song rather than a book or anything like that. That didn’t come until many, many years later, but these things happen. But then not long after that time, I did start to write my dreams down, write them down regularly. And I had read this book just called An Experiment with Time by a fellow named JW Dunne who published in the twenties, and he was an aeronautics engineer. Long story short, he had discovered by chance that bits and pieces of his own future were turning up ahead of time. So it wasn’t like he was predicting something to happen, or he knew that, oh my God, I have to tell so-and-so not to take this flight or something like that. But he subsequently discovered that something he had dreamt would happen that day or the next day. And so I did the same thing he did. I just started writing my dreams down, and lo and behold, it was true. So that was about 1980 ish. And since then, off and on, and now for the past, quite some time, I’ve been doing it quite regularly. And as I said, I wound up in, I think it was 2020 during the first lockdown here writing this book about that.

AD: We did a crossover episode with the Bureau of Lost Culture, and they featured an interview you did on that show with Alan Moore, and you talked a little bit about that. I remember thinking, part of what struck me so much was, and I think that this is, if you embark even just a little bit in that dream practice of writing down what you remember from your dreams, it is strange how quite striking certain instances will be when that exact thing occurs or something so much like it occurs in the waking day. But I think that part of what makes it so funny, and maybe sometimes obscures the potential miraculous nature of these things, is how quotidian this stuff is. It’s like it doesn’t end up usually being a dramatic, world-changing event. It’s more like, I dreamed I needed to get an oil change and my check oil light came on.

Gary Lachman: No, no, no, you’re absolutely right. I mean, I say the ones that we hear about are what I call the “two Ds,” it’s the disasters or it’s the derby. So some horrible thing happens or somebody wins at the races, and these do happen. I mean, those are the famous moments, and we know about them, but as you say, 90% of them are everyday things. And you wonder, why did I have a precognitive dream about that? Although I have to say on occasion, they have been very helpful to me on occasion in sense of, I would find myself in some awkward situation, and I would realize, oh my God, yes, this, that dream I had. And I was able to back away at times, but other times not. And you realize, oh, Jesus, this is what I dreamt about. But no, it is like that. It is very, very strange, but I think it’s fairly common. And I wound up writing the book because I gave a talk here in London on hypnagogia, this in-between state, between sleeping and waking, which, it’s a very, very, very creative state, but it’s also related to a variety of different paranormal phenomena. But precognition is one of them. And I tacked on a couple of accounts of precognitive dreams, and I said, if you want my own and some historical ones, and they said, well, look, if you’re really interested in this, you should just write your dreams down. And somebody, the next day when I went on to, well, it was called Twitter, then. Went on to that, was at my talk, and she said, OMG! Exclamation point. It’s true. And whatever this fellow said, if I wrote my dreams down, and then she attached whatever it was, and it was her dream. She had walked out her door in the dream and saw a hedgehog, these strange animals that were here in Britain And picked it up, it was on the street and took it out of the street and put it over into a hedge, where the hedgehog should be. Up in the bush or something like that. And then that was a dream. And then she woke up, and then she went on to her social media feed, and the very first thing she saw was a post about how to protect the hedgehogs. And then she wrote that to me, and

I said, well, yeah, it’s not a one-to-one exact lineup, but it’s not far off. You dreamt about protecting the hedgehogs, and this was the first thing you saw. And that’s what we usually have precognitive dreams about, is about our own experience. It’s what we’re going to watch on television or what we’re going to get in the mail, or what we’re going to see out in the street, or something like that. And if you bother to write your dreams down and to pay attention, I would say sooner or later you’ll notice that, oh my God. And sometimes it’s one-on-one exactly. But more often than not, it’s what I say, it’s subject to symbolic distortion, because dreams in themselves speak in this kind of symbolic language rather than the kind of literal, logical language.

AD: How often have you heard somebody describe a dream and they say something along the lines of, I was in this house, but it wasn’t that house. It was actually this other house. These kind of weird layered, almost paradoxical, situations are just normal in dreams, that are just every day, the quality that they’re made of. Yeah, I think that’s fascinating.  

One of the people we’ve had on this podcast a handful of times is the great occult writer, Mitch Horowitz, who did a whole podcast about some of the lab studies you’re talking about in terms of measuring telepathy. I think that’s fascinating. But I also like that the first thing that you wrote about, it wasn’t a book, it was a great song. And I mean, I’m curious, I think that’s just in the same way that your dreams can reveal things to you. I think art that you make often ends up explaining things back to you that you don’t quite know on a rational level, but might know on an emotional level or a spiritual level or something deeper. How often you hear people talk about understanding something they wrote much later. I think that maybe it is a similar thing going on there. You know what I mean, in terms of tapping into that, whatever that is, if it’s an over mind, if it’s a cosmic consciousness, I don’t know exactly what I would call it, but it seems that art, in the same way dreams can reveal things to us that our own art can do that too.

Gary Lachman: When I wrote songs, they just came out or they didn’t. 

AD: You talked about that first verse of “Touched By,” it was like that all was one thing tumbled out, right?

Gary Lachman: It all just came out, and then the next and the next. I either wrote a song in five minutes, or I didn’t write it. It all just came out, and I said, [it came from] absorbing the ‘60s [sensibility], very lyrical. I mean, the ‘60s stuff is more or less upbeat. I don’t know how A to F#m means something, and D to G means something. But yes, feelings go with those chords and all that. It’s simple as that. It all just came out, and that just tumbled out. And I mean, I do feel like sometimes that things are written already, and you just kind of are a vessel for it, as it were. It flows down into you. But that just came out. 

And what happened was, a couple things happened. One was, after Lisa and I separated, I found that I wasn’t quite inspired anymore to write songs. And then after we didn’t get my band, The Know, we came pretty close to landing a contract here and there, but then it never quite got exactly there. So I got a little discouraged from that, and then I was reading so much again. So in a way, the reading and my wanting to understand these things intellectually, I guess you could say left with a left brain, and the music is the right brain, it just kind of poured out. It’s the soul of the poet and all that. But I think a variety of different things, you change over time and all that. And so that’s one of the things that happened was I found that I couldn’t write songs anymore once I couldn’t do that. I really wasn’t interested. My last, my ever work as a kind of hired gun, was playing two tours with Iggy Pop, just as a guitarist. 

AD: As you already mentioned, touring with him in Blondie. But I mean, obviously he’s one of the greats. I can’t imagine what it would’ve been like sharing a stage with Iggy.

Gary Lachman: It was wild. We did two North American tours on the second one, Clem Burke was the drummer. And Carlos Alomar, who was one of David Bowie’s guitarists. On that tour, he had three guitarists. I just was playing rhythm guitar. And Rob Duprey, who had been in a band called The Mumps in New York during the CBGB days…He was a very good guitarist, and he had been working with Iggy for a while. And what had happened there is Ivan Král, who would play with Patti Smith and who had originally played with Debbie, but who left Debbie to play with Patti Smith. He jumped ship on this tour with Iggy, and I had disbanded The Know. 

I wasn’t doing anything. I just was hanging out in New York and not knowing what to do with myself. And he asked, do you want to come on tour? And here’s the money, I said, who is it? It’s Iggy. I said, yeah, sure. So I knew probably half of the songs already just from jamming around, and then I learned the others as quickly as possible. And then we just got on a tour bus, and then it was like, yeah, The Wild Bunch. So yeah, he was absolutely remarkable. And I mean, one of the great stories from those tours is the second tour when we played the Silver Bowl in Detroit, third on the bill to Santana, and then The Rolling Stones. And the story is they threw everything they could at us, threw everything possible at us. But that was a fantastic, fantastic show.

AD: Yeah, I mean, it seems like it must’ve been a wild ride. One thing I was really surprised by in the book was, so the incredible producer, Craig Leon, who I’ve had the pleasure of speaking with about his work, who worked with The Ramones, Blondie, obviously, Suicide. So he arranged a jam session between you and Dwight Twilley and Phil Seymour. I didn’t know about that at all, and I found myself contemplating some parallel timeline where you hook up with that crew and what, I guess join the Dwight Twilley band or whatever. I love the music of Dwight Twilley and Phil Seymour, so I was surprised. What do you remember about that jam session?

Gary Lachman: Well, I mean, we just kind of played away. He had some tune, so just show me the chords. And again, I was never a very good studio musician, so I could play my own things, but I could play other stuff. But I wasn’t somebody who was completely adept with someone else’s sort of stuff. But it was fun. And God, I don’t know where it exists. I did have a cassette of the one track we laid down, and I played some guitar, but I did some work with Phil Seymour later on, or actually, it was around the same time, somebody named Moon Martin. I don’t know if he’s still around, but he had some hit song. He wrote “Cadillac Walk.”  And then he was doing a solo album, and Craig Leon was producing it. So he got Phil Seymour on drums, me on bass, and a cheap trick. Were recording something in the studio next door, and we were all getting stoned on these joints and playing this pinball machine that was rigged. You won no matter what you scored on it. 

AD: I think that those guys are, they’re still underrated, the late Dwight Twilley and the late Phil Seymour, but it’s such a funny, I don’t want to, don’t always rush to ascribe synchronicity to certain things. It could just be coincidence, of course. But while reading your book, I’ve also been listening to the audio book of Mike Campbell from Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, and he’s talking about Phil Seymour being brought in to potentially replace Stan Lynch and the Heartbreakers at one point. And so I just feel like Phil and Dwight have been following me through my reading lately, which is a fun coincidence.

Gary Lachman: Right, right, right. Well, during that time, and I was recording with him, I got to know Phil, Phil a bit that he had that hit “Precious to Me.”

AD: I love, that

Gary Lachman: Was a very, very good song. Well, “I’m on Fire,” that Dwight. That had a certain Texas Big Beat sound.

AD: Great song. Great song.

Gary Lachman: Yeah.

AD: Yeah. It’s funny though. I mean, and it is interesting, those songs being songs that you were drawn to, because you talked about it, that there is a sort of a ‘60s thing when you’re doing your stuff. I hadn’t heard a lot of the Known material, but went back and listened to some of that stuff too. And I don’t know, I would be curious if songs ever start coming back into your head, but you had some pretty great ones for a run there.

Gary Lachman: Well, thank you. Well, I did briefly. I had a brief tenure again with Blondie, right? Again, this is, again, this is ages ago now. But yeah, strangely, when I first moved here at the beginning of ‘96, then towards the end of that year, I wound up going back to New York and working with Blondie. This was just before they put out or on the way to putting out that revival album or whatever you call them. And so I went back, we recorded a song of mine that I used to do with my band, the Know called “Amor Fati,” and it’s actually, it’s the phantom Blondie track that’s never been released, but it’s up on YouTube as far as I still recall. But it’s my song. I played bass and guitar on it and Clems on it, and Jimmy produced it and played keyboards, Debbie singing and all that. But during that time, I did a bunch of shows with them. Also, big concert. We were shows with Bjork, Beck, Jamiroquai, Kula Shaker.

It was like one of these stadium gigs where there’s whatever, 20 bands or something, and Blondie. But that was fun. I hadn’t done anything like that. That was all this stuff happened out of nowhere. I mean, I was living in London. Chris called me and said, oh, you got to come back to New York and put the original band back together, blah, blah. And the first thing I wound up doing with them was this, the Nova Convention in Lawrence, Kansas. It was this celebration of William Burroughs. He was still alive. And it was weird. I hadn’t been in that world in ages. 

And suddenly I’m in hip central. So I wind up playing with Chris and Debbie. We all do a number, but Laurie Anderson is involved in Patti Smith, Philip Glass, and a bunch of all these other people. And it was kind of like, yeah, I haven’t been in this world in about 15 years. It strange to be in it again and all that. And we did these stadium gigs, but the brief then for me was to write songs. So when I came back to London, I wound up writing a lot of songs again. But then, well, I told the story, not so much in this book, but in an earlier memoir called New York Rocker. I think Chris wanted to recreate the original circumstances that led to the Blondie success. So that meant that I had to leave the band again. So I say in the end of New York rocker, I think I’m the only person in rock and roll to have got kicked out of the same band twice, like a 20 year hiatus in between.

AD: I do think that that’s a unique achievement, Gary. There you go.

Gary Lachman: Worthy of Guinness, don’t you think?

AD: I’ve got to say, this book is also a unique achievement because it is really fun and it’s deeply, it’s exploratory. I love that you are able to, through telling the story of your own life and your own interests, provide this look at not just the cross section between metaphysics, consciousness, what we call new age and all of that stuff, and the world of music, creativity, and art. But you also do so in a way that it just sort puts me the reader in your shoes in this way. And it just felt like a very vividly sort of embodied book. 

It’s not quite the Proust Madeline situation where I’m able to remember this, but it does give me a sense of place and a sense of location. When you write about The Bodhi Tree. You’re talking about William Shatner coming in or whatever, or members of Blondie, Debbie and Chris or Tom Verlaine, who a legendary book-aphile, of course. But it seems like he was a little put off by you.

Gary Lachman: Well, Tom is always a bit stand off-ish. No, I don’t tell it in this story, but I do tell a funny story about the Blondie UK tour. The booking agent wanted a CBGBs package. So they had television, and then they got Blondie, which was strange because Blondie had been a long time kind of not necessarily feuded with Television, but with Patti Smith who was associated with Television. There was this whole kind of mafia. But any case, we’re on this, and I forget what hotel we’re in somewhere, and it’s like I’m in the lift or the elevator and Jimmy’s in it, and it’s either Richard Lloyd or Clem or something, and Verlaine’s the closest one to the buttons, and the door closes, but you have to press the button for it to go anywhere. And he doesn’t do it. And everybody’s kind of looking at him saying, “Press the button, Tom!” It’s this kind of thing. He was so not there. But no, but this kind of the genius—often the stratosphere. But I have to say on that tour, all the praise they were getting, I thought was completely, completely warranted. I mean, they were so atypical of actually what was considered punk. There were guitar band, the work between Verlaine and Lloyd. It was just remarkable. And the songs are really, really good and all of that. So I became a real kind of fan, as it were, of Verlaine’s work. But yeah, he worked at the Strand Bookshop in New York, and episode did Patti Smith, and so did Richard Hell. Again. That was the other thing about that time in New York, there was this connection between this high energy, very chord based, riff based kind of music with this sort of literary illusions and symbolic poetry and things like that.

AD: It was sort of all in the mix, and it all made its way into that culture. And then to sort of see it from your perspective blossoming on the West Coast as that sort of next stage of the wellness mindfulness sort of thing comes, I felt like this was a beautiful social history as well as sort of a personal one. And it was really a lot, as I mentioned, it was a lot of fun, and it was kind of a wild ride. And I found myself really, really moved by one line in it where you’re talking, yeah, you wrote, we are not chance creatures of no importance in a purposeless universe. Such a belief is merely a way of avoiding our task, the universe, the cosmos needs us, and we would not be here if it didn’t. And I got to say, Gary, that’s a pretty profound and beautiful little encapsulation of something there. And I feel like it’s a very easy time to feel as if it is a purposeless universe, or maybe even to employ agnostic terminology. Again, the demiurge seems quite in control, but I think that you’re onto something there. And I think that this book ends sort of where the next step of your life really begins as you actually become a writer. And so I feel like the sequel is imminent…

Gary Lachman: I got to see how well this one does

AD: “Still touched by the presence, touched once again…”

Gary Lachman: Slapped by the presence. 

AD: Lightly on the backside or whatever. I’m not spoiling anything I don’t think for the reader, but although this book concludes as you start, as you begin to approach, when you will be writing books, and that part of you begins to find expression through your work, you take a special moment to note sort of an attraction to late bloomers. People who get started doing things in their, let’s say in their forties or something like that, as you are. And I found that to be really also quite moving as somebody who has not written a book, but really knows that I need to, I just turned 40 last year, and there is a, I’ll be vulnerable for the sake of our listeners. Sometimes the fear that you’re washed up does creep in. But then I look at somebody like you and it’s like, nah, you can still write a lot of books, man, if you get going…

Gary Lachman: Fear is a good motivator. Let me tell you. It’s true. Fear that I will not, no, but I tell you, get out whatever you got in you, now’s the time, now’s the time to do it. No, I mean, he said Life against at 40, the one I’ve been living since then. Certainly did. And there’s a lot, I mean, Henry Miller, he was one of my favorite writers, and I was in my late teens and first living in New York and starving and all this, but he didn’t start to really write until his sort of late thirties into his forties and there’s so many others. So I mean, you have these ones start early and flare up. Rimbaud writes a bunch of stuff and then never hear from him again and that kind of thing. And then there’s others have long careers and then those, it takes a while. And I just was determined and I had an earlier, I wouldn’t say a false start, but I had an earlier, I fell into a situation where earlier means of expression presented itself to me to speak abstractly. I mean, I just got into playing. The other thing too is I was always reading, but I mean I was a rock and roller. I was jumping around, I was pogoing, doing all that kind of stuff, but I was always reading. I was reading lots of fantasy and all that kind stuff too. 

I tell the story, this wonderful teacher I had in high school my last year in high school who took me aside basically. And he started giving me books to read like Sarte and Nietzsche and things like that, and he taught the rest of the class whatever the regular curriculum was. So he was testing me on this other stuff. And so I just had a bent for that kind of thing. 

And then when I was working at the Bodhi Tree, this wonderful metaphysical new age bookshop, it doesn’t exist anymore, but it was quite well known in the ‘80s and ‘90s, the early 2000s. But while I was doing that, working there in the late, I was earning a philosophy degree. That was my job choice. That was my career choice after playing rock and roll was to teach philosophy. And when my philosophy professors found out what I was doing before they found this incomprehensible, they said, no, you don’t want to do this. We want to do what you did. This is boring what we do and all that. But I seriously wanted to understand this kind of stuff. So I love doing my undergraduate, but when I got into the graduate level, then it gets kind of boring actually. 

I tried to find a place in myself in the real world in between playing rock and roll and then wanting to write, but not being able to write or not writing anything that I thought was worthwhile or anyone else was worthwhile. About 10 years trying to find myself. And then the dark night of the soul starts to approach around my forties and I’m thinking, oh, well maybe I’m not going to be who I want to be. Maybe I should settle for this. I already had this career already done, things that people envy me for and so on and so on, that kind of thing. And this is when I had this job I should never have had as a science writer for University of California Los Angeles. And I got it by accident. 

I was writing magazine articles and book reviews and things like that, but not a book. And I had written some articles about chaos theory and complexity, pop science kind of things. But I had been living off a surprise royalty check from some Blondie’s greatest hits compilation. So it came out of the blue and they thought I dropped out of doing the graduate school. I dropped out of that paying my share of expenses with who the woman I subsequently came to refer to affectionately as my future ex-wife, we were sharing our flat and paying my share, but to royalties that I come in unexpectedly. But she didn’t think that was good. She thought I should get a real job. And she saw an ad for the science writer in the LA Times. She said, why don’t you apply for that? And I thought, brilliant, I’ll never get the job. I have no science background and I’ll get her off my back. That kind of thing. So I applied, but then they so liked what I had written. They said, when do you want to start? 

So I got this job. It was very, very well paying. And I had my own parking space and office and secretary and all this kind of stuff. It was a very, very good salary. Said, well, okay, well maybe I’m not going to be what I want to be, but here I’m doing this and blah dah dah and I should be happy. And I just realized I wasn’t. And they talk about bringing forth what is within you, what came forth from within me then was this very loud? No, that I wasn’t happy. And subsequent to that, everything fell apart, but it needed to, but it fell apart. And the falling apart of it led to my winding up at the end of a breakdown of other things moving here beginning of 1996.

AD: Yeah. Well it’s funny to think about how all those things, the pogoing, the learning, how to write science into readable copy, all of those things, I think inform what make your books good and readable and enjoyable on a level. And so I guess, yeah, it’s funny how often we get stuck in our own heads about what should be or where we should be at a certain point. But it does all seem to be building. It all goes into whatever comes out. And in your case, all of that experience I think does come through and whether or not there’s a sequel to this book, it’s really something that we have this one in addition to your quite prolific output. And so Gary, thank you for taking the time to hang out with us to talk about all this fun stuff and to really get into it. We appreciate it very much.

Gary Lachman: Well, it’s been absolutely my pleasure. And thank you, you’ve really paid attention to the book and I am very, very grateful for that. So thank you very much.

 

 
 Posted on November 12, 2025November 27, 2025Gary Lachman Podcast
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });