# Transmissions :: William Tyler (2025)

**Transmissions — William Tyler (2025)** · _2025-04-23_ · by Jason Woodbury · `podcast`
**Tags:** William Tyler, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/04/23/transmissions-william-tyler-2025/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://williamtyler.bandcamp.com/album/time-indefinite

## Body

This week, a return appearance from William Tyler. As a guitarist and sideman, William has worked with the Silver Jews, Lambchop, and other forward leaning acts, balancing a deep understanding of tradition with experimental energy. His own records have found him drifting from Takoma School style finger picking to a zone that hovers in-between krautrock and country; in recent years, he’s expanded even further, with incredible beat driven collaborations with Four Tet and the fried psychedelia of his full band Secret Stratosphere project. 

His latest work is called Time Indefinite, out this week via Psychic Hotline. It’s a strange and meditative record, and it’s a new high water mark for Tyler. On this episode of the show, we toss out the script in favor of following Tyler’s thoughts; like the indefinite time his new album references, linearity isn’t always the focus in this talk. And while we touch on more than a few heavy topics, including addiction, climate change, and the sad state of satirical art, this one is an entry in our “hangout episodes” series, the DAW rolling along just for good measure. 

Transmissions :: William Tyler

Next week on Transmissions: Yuka Honda 

William Tyler: How are you doing?



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Aquarium Drunkard:  Man, it has been a year. 

William Tyler: It’s been a really long three months, right? 

AD: It’s been a really long 2025. I feel like. It’s like that 30 Rock joke where she goes, what a week? And Jack Donahue goes, ‘Lemon. It’s Tuesday.’

William Tyler: Yeah, no, totally. 

AD: But for real, it’s been a strange year. I got sick right at the start of the year, and of course got tested and I had COVID again. It was like the worst, but it wasn’t really as bad. It’s just kind of a drag to get it a third time. You know what I mean? 

William Tyler: Yeah, no kidding. Yeah, it doesn’t get more fun. 

AD: It doesn’t get more fun, even if it gets less severe maybe in some ways. But yeah, and then just a bunch of family stuff. But that said, we’re okay. We’re alive. Not everybody is. 

William Tyler: I think combination of it being, I don’t know, I guess it never really gets to be winter out there, but wow. It has been really feels like a long time since the new year, which is also kind of interesting to put in perspective considering how quickly the last five years have just disappeared into this strange vortex. 

AD: That’s such a good way to put it. It is like a time vortex, and we’ll get into the Time Indefinite album title and talk a little bit about that. But just as we reflect for the listeners, you’ve been on this show a lot over the years in various incarnations, and it’s always great to have you on. But with this show, I get to talk to a lot of artists who I really like and I have the opportunity to glean a lot of insight from them. But there are sort of rarer instances where you end up sort of becoming friends with somebody who you talk to on the podcast, and that’s the case with you and I. 

And when you talk about the last five years, you’re such a huge part of that for me because our book club was a big pandemic moment for me. That whole time, those conversations, they mean a lot to me, and they really helped me think through some of that weirdness. So that feels simultaneously like we did our book club 25 years ago and 15 minutes ago—and it’s the absolutely strangest thing. And I guess just to start, I wonder if we could talk about that, about perception of time and when the pandemic hit five whole years ago. Did something happen to the way we think about time in your opinion or experience it or conceive of it, or whatever? 

William Tyler: I think it probably did to everyone of a certain age. I think that children and younger people, I don’t even really know what cutoff point that would be…There’s many, many ways that we can get into this where I feel like I’m either 15 years old again or four months old maybe, I just had my literal midlife. I just turned 45, so maybe I’m three months into the rest of my life. Yeah, I think that it did, it changed. I think that this is the biggest event of not just our generation, but multiple generations. I’ve had numerous conversations with my parents who are both, they’re both 74, and they don’t consider Vietnam and all that, the Civil Rights movement and the ‘60s. It’s like, no, this was actually the most intense thing we’ve ever been through, just psychologically. Meaning the pandemic. I am by nature an impatient person, and so I worry about time a lot. I have this sort of scarcity complex, which is hilarious considering that I come from a lot of privilege and affirmation and some would say self-indulgence [laughs] but I have a weird, it’s probably connected to a lot of things. I’m starting to connect back to Asperger’s, honestly. But I’m just very conscious of time, always looking at clocks and looking at calendars and counting days. And I didn’t do that for a long time in my 30s. I was much more in a flow state, and most of that was good. But it all crashed with lockdown just like it did for a lot of people. And I never really came out of it, I’m kind of working my way out of it. I think this year the stakes are pretty high for me personally, if not artistically, because I have to get back to…I’m not going to get back to my old self who I was five years ago or four years ago really. 

But I would like to get back to, a holistic, mature sense of self. That’s a redefinition of some younger things that I probably needed to let go of, but also some optimism that I also probably let go of. And I think that, it’s funny, I don’t smoke pot, but my dad always jokes about, well, if you’re worried about time moving too fast, smoke pot, which does work, sometimes it’s agonizingly so if you’re on the wrong kind, which I usually am, which is why I don’t smoke it. I mean I think that’s what is the multi-volume Proust book that we probably won’t, I would like to think I would read someday. Oh, it’s like In Search of Lost Time is one of the titles for it, right? 

AD: Well, I’m going to take your word for it. I don’t know it unfortunately. It’s like it’s not up there. 

William Tyler: I mean, I haven’t read it, but I know this is like a dumb thing for me to talk about. 

AD: William, we’re on a podcast. You’re supposed to only talk about things you don’t have any idea about. 

William Tyler: Oh, right. All these history podcasts now that are just four hours of one white guy talking to a mic with no one questioning any assertions he’s making, that’s an interesting format. 

AD: Are you talking about Hardcore History? We’re not talking about him, right? 

William Tyler: I’m not talking about Hardcore History. I’m actually talking about some of the Planet Fitness, maybe Ayn Rand run-off hardcore histories. Anyway, I don’t want to get into that. That’s depressing. Yeah, there’ll be moments. Perfect example, right before I logged on, our mutual friend, Jocelyn Romo, she has this great show on NTS called Heaven and Earth Magic, and I believe today is the fifth anniversary episode. 

AD: That’s so cool.

William Tyler: It’s really cool, honestly, she’s who got me into NTS, but it’s so weird for me to think that was five years ago. Just to put a bow on this thought process, I’ve watched a lot of people who I’m close to and some that I’m not close to go through some pretty epoch defining, epoch defining, having kids or marriage or death or career changes. Good God, all sorts of things, like moving to different countries. And I honestly just feel like for a variety of reasons that we can or don’t have to get into, but I’m sure we will,  I kind of feel like I’ve been stuck, and I know the reasons why, and a lot of them are kind of my responsibility and a lot of them just aren’t, just like most things in life. But I will say that, and I try not to put too much pressure on myself or any expectations about this record because I don’t think is my last chance at making a record. But it does feel like the first time I’ve been able to fully creatively express myself in something that I at least control the narrative about since actually in a long time, honestly, when Goes West came out in 2019, it’s funny too because the title wasn’t meant to really evoke anything imperialistic. It was kind of a satire of that, but it is a very grandiose, aspirational kind of record. And that’s the sound of it. And it was me trying to be consciously probably a little more commercial, if instrumental music of that kind can be commercial. But since then I’ve been working on a lot of different things, just like a lot of people. But this album is the first manifestation of a new creative, emotional, spiritual reality that I’ve been sort of wrestling with the last few years. I guess I have been going through a lot of changes. It’s just been kind of in a hermetic, not really hermetic, but more of a hibernation period, you know what I mean? 

AD: Well, it’s funny because you’ve been steadily releasing music. There hasn’t been really any, from the outside, if I were just looking as a listener without any knowledge of any of your personal stuff from the outside, you’ve been still quite productive. You’ve had a couple of great records that I think started to, in some ways, crack at the edges of what William Tyler records were, or at least had been for a few years. And now on this record, Time Indefinite, I think you see sort of a blooming of a lot of those little seeds. I found myself thinking, and not just because we’ve talked about Mark Fisher before, but I found myself thinking about the concept of a sort of American hauntology. And I feel like have that’s been something that’s been emerging and kind of expressing itself more and more in your work. At least what I hear is that idea, don’t know if it’s an elegy or if it’s something of mourning. There’s a quality that comes in through the use specifically of samples AM radio, radiophonic elements, stuff that I know that we both share a lot of attraction to. I hear that, and it’s stuff that the previous things had been kind of pushing towards that. 

And then also, of course, you had stuff with Four Tet. That stuff was a whole different vibe. It was you; I could tell it was you, but it was you in a mode that was very, very different from anything I’ve heard. I think that that idea of a hibernation or you’ve gone into the chrysalis or whatever, and you’re emerging as the new William Tyler, there’s a lot of truth to that. But it also, I wanted to go back to something you had said about feeling sort of impatient or having a scarcity mindset regarding time. I empathize with that a lot. I am somebody who, for better or worse, is always doing things and maybe always doing too many things, or at least that’s the way it feels sometimes. And I find myself unable, even as a 40-year-old adult human, to think I don’t have enough time to do it all. Doesn’t matter that for however long I have been doing some version of it all. Maybe I don’t have enough time to do it all as well as I want or as deeply as I want, or whatever. 

And then you add into that this thing that I think we’ve all, I recently had taped a conversation with Yuka Honda for the podcast, and we were talking about literature, and I was like, “Hey, I got to ask you, are you having trouble reading as much these days? I don’t have the attention span.” And I think in this bizarre information deluge that we, I don’t want to say are forced to experience, we all do opt in whether we like that or not. You know what I mean? It’s our opting in is really the only thing in our control, but nobody wants to not know what’s going on. Nobody wants to not be a part of the conversation. So we sort of opt into these things and then we find ourselves negotiating a lot of questions about where our attention goes and where it’s led, and if we’re genuinely forming critical thoughts or accidentally parroting things that we heard on podcasts. You know what I mean? All these questions come into focus. And so I guess it feels like it’s all sort of tied together. I think one of the last times we talked, it was right after you had done the live record, and you said something along the lines of, I have no interest in any technology right now. It’s driving me nuts. And I wonder if that feeling is continued for you. 

William Tyler: I don’t know exactly what context I said that in. 

AD: I might’ve been asking you about AI technology or something. 

William Tyler: Well, I’m fascinated by it. I joke a lot about how for a lot of reasons it was born in the wrong time.

AD: What would’ve been the right time, you think? Or in your dream? 

William Tyler: I mean, I think there’s different iterations of that. It’s like I’m a white guy, so I could be like, you know what I mean? 

AD: You’re saying dealer’s choice. You’ve got a lot of options. 

William Tyler: Well, I’m just acknowledging that totally. Probably a boomer, for the good and the bad reasons. But it’s funny, I think, who was the director? I mean, I like his stuff, but I’m not a huge fan. Robert Eggers said he never wanted to do a movie that was modern because he didn’t want to have to film anyone using a smartphone. And I was like, that nailed something to me actually, when I watch a movie, and it doesn’t matter what the context is because obviously smartphones have been with us since, what, 16 years? Basically, more that? I get emotionally kicked out of a movie in any context. When I see people using a smartphone, I always joke about one of my favorite movies is All the President’s Men, and it’s all pay phones, and it’s a lot of pay phones and landlines, and you’re hearing both sides of the conversation. And it’s actually kind of the sound mix on that that movie is about as incredible as anything, but it would be so boring if it was like now it would just be like, “Yo, Bob, it’s Carl Bernstein. Yo man, I just checked my Discord and figured out who Deep Throat was, so let’s go get a bubble tea.” I mean, the movie would be like five minutes long. There’d be no suspense. So, I think aesthetically and maybe emotionally a little bit, probably more boomer generation, but then also I have a lot of issues with the kind of blind spot entitlement things of that generation. I think about a lot about the Enlightenment, 18th century. That’s kind of my favorite music really, is Baroque classical. If I had to pick one genre that I never get tired of listening to, it would probably be post-Baroque classical alongside late ‘60s, ‘70s spiritual jazz. 

AD: That’s pretty good. If you got a “desert island” it, that makes sense 

William Tyler: Just in terms of a vast era of music. But I could just drop into it emotionally, I’m kind of at home, but a lot of people feel like that about dub, and I totally get that. I don’t know as much about dub as I’d like to anyway. I think both of us, we’re trying to do a lot. We are multitaskers. I think we have this similar concept of trying to do a lot. The internet is incredible. I go into Wikipedia rabbit holes pretty much every day or every night, and maybe it makes it a little harder to focus on reading a book at a time, which is why I like to mention going back to our book club, our COVID book club. That was really nice. But I’m still a pretty focused reader. 

But yeah, I am starting to have a different attitude about AI because I think that it’s not saying this naively, I think it is going to destroy a lot of the more ground level, making things, type stuff. I mean, it’s like the people who, when the Edison wax cylinder came around, the people who made sheet music were mad when talkies came around. The silent movie stars were scared. I’m sure when the printing press came around, when the printing press came around, the clergy were terrified. But I talk to people in the medical field who are friends, both actual medicine and research and social work therapy, and all of them are using AI in ways that really makes their jobs easier and more efficient, and where they can actually take on more caseload stuff at a time where we really need that because we have a mental and physical health crisis in our society. 

So, I see things like that as being positive parts of AI that frankly, we don’t have to embrace it, but we do have to accept it to degree because it’s not going anywhere. Now, the environmental cost of AI, let alone the spiritual and cultural dimensions of it, I do have a lot of problems with, I’m very much a humanist deep down, so it’s not going to write A Love Supreme or a Bach concerto or an Albert Brooks movie. It’s just not going to, if it gets to that point, then there actually means there is a soul to the machine, which I know is what a lot of singularity is about. That’s a lot of what HAL in 2001 is about. It’s like by the end, you actually get the sense he has emotions. But then theologically, I really would have to question, I do have a sense of what God is, I think to me, and it doesn’t allow for machines to have a soul.

AD: So, I think I agree. What I also think though is that we as humans have such a desire and tendency to create these all-powerful others and sort of use them as a mirror to look at ourselves. And so I feel like part of what scares people about AI is the implicit understanding that without the human component of the internet as sort of like its raw fuel, it doesn’t really do much. I’m speaking much more specifically in terms of the art side of things, in terms of music, visuals, images, because when it comes to stuff like medical stuff, and we’re talking about processing raw data, that is cool. And I don’t understand why the AI isn’t just giving me a tax bill at the end of the year and saying the US government being like, “Hey, we figured it out for you this time, this is how much you owe,” as opposed to this arcane system of, I’m not saying I want to give the US government the power to do that necessarily. 

William Tyler: Oh, they have the power to do it. They do have the power, but don’t worry, the way Elon’s dismantling everything. 

AD: There will be no mechanism by which to exert that control because, it’s a vacuum. No, but I want to know, where’s the AI that’s combing the Pacific Ocean and getting that garbage islands under control, those sorts of. How can we use stuff like that? Because I do think we’re up against these existential threats. This is something that we’ve talked about on the show in the past climate change and really grappling with it. Now, granted, here’s this thing, like you said, we’re exerting vast environmental cost we’re taking, but it becomes this question of what can we actually do with this stuff? 

Or what does this technology do? But when it comes to the parroting of human art, I agree with you. I haven’t seen anything from it. The purely generative stuff that even hints at soul or intent or craft, it’s very raw, but then I think about the fact that there are people on the internet who see that stuff, particularly boomers who are just looking at AI generated memes all day long, and it scans as something to them. 

It’s a very strange thing. You know what I mean? And so, I think about as we enter, such a strange world where it is going to be a wrecking ball that does all these other things. As a humanist sort of, I think just widening our perception and imagination and enough to imagine the ways that maybe the technology could be used effectively is something that’s still very possible. We could still do that, but we need to do that on a vast scale across the board. We need to start imagining better everything. And I don’t feel like we’re in a time of a lot of imagination.

William Tyler: Yeah, we’re not here.

AD: That’s what it is. We’re not in it. 

William Tyler: I feel like the western world, and I hate that term, but whatever that means. Obviously in the Middle Ages, it didn’t include the United States or North America, but in terms of the European Dark Ages.

I think intellectually and spiritually, the United States and whoever it drags down with it, which is going to be a lot of Europe, possibly some other client states like Israel and whatever, but I don’t know the Judeo-Christian western world. We are already in the beginning stages of a very, what I would consider a new dark age. It’s so funny because five or six years ago, people would just randomly, not people who I necessarily trusted intellectually, but people would kind of be like, I think Elon’s cool. He’s just so smart, and he’s forward thinking, and it’s like he’s actually not forward thinking. He’s not that smart, and he’s actually not a very good businessman. So I would argue that we are sort of in the hands of these people that are these technocratic nihilists and certainly Rand-y, or Darwinian. They don’t give a shit about anybody except the billionaire class, but they’re not really that smart, and they’re really uncreative, and I think that now they have a lot of really smart, creative people working for them. 

And you can’t paint Silicon Valley and tech stuff with one brush. But when you have someone who is probably literally never read a book as president and this kind of nihilistic death cult version of Christian Evangelism, which lines up very nicely with a sort of nihilistic version of the Death Cult of what Zionism is now and Fundamental Islam, frankly, I just see a lot of this part of the world going into a dark ages, and the people who are running our society right now, and I am actually specifically speaking about the United States, they’re not going to have these great ideas about moving us forward with the technology they helped create. There’s a reason it’s called fossil fuels. Of course, it literally is carbon fossils, but the metaphorical use of the word fossil implies no growth and old thinking, and that’s what we’re trapped in. 

So I don’t know enough about science or certainly climate science to be like, is there a way for AI to be carbon neutral or whatever? Probably not right now, but I think all people like us always joke about the more comical dystopian aspects of what we’re going through. The Mike Judge version, while we also, of course acknowledge the really sinister kind of Philip Dick version of it. But really the truth is, I read an article the other day, I can’t even remember who it was. It wasn’t somebody I agree with. It was a conservative columnist; I think Bret Stevens maybe. He said he had this whole column about; “democracy dies in dumbness,” and they really resonated with me. I think that is an essence of what’s happening. While at the same time we are everyday people and able to grasp the intellect of the universe through the internet, and we do have voices. At least right now. There are very specific things apparently that you cannot speak about that the free speech people, I thought they were the party of free speech. But anyway, that’s a whole other thing. 

AD: We had Moby on the podcast, and we were talking, and I was sort of arguing maybe from a place of pure intuition and no scientific backing that I think on some level, everybody knows that climate change is happening. I think cellularly deep down in something that if we want to call it a soul, if we want to call it deep memory, collective unconscious, whatever you want to call it I believe everybody knows that it’s happening on some level. And he was arguing that he does not believe that everybody knows that because he thinks we’re getting dumber. And of course, he was specifically talking about IQ rates and stuff, and I get that because there is a certain level of consciously people don’t know this, or maybe they choose not to know it, or they figure out a way around knowing it or whatever. But I wasn’t talking about that. I think I was talking about something more like what you’re saying, which is see the death drive thing. It can’t just get there on its own. It has to have an element of truth to it on some bizarre level or psychic truth or something for it to resonate, and that death drive is in full force, but it’s like this inarticulate and really shocking and violent thing. But I know you’re somebody who, God, I’m so tempted to go in a million different directions. 

William Tyler: Don’t want to interrupt because I want to clarify this. First of all, there’s a lot of issues I have with Moby, but I don’t think intuition and IQ are very parallel. I mean, that is my intuition. But I wanted to clarify just before we get any deeper, just what you mean by the death drive, I have a certain understanding of it. 

AD: I guess what I mean is the death drive is maybe more…

William Tyler: Do you know The Denial of Death, the Ernest Becker book? That’s kind of whatever my internal thesis of the death drive would probably be based around that kind of post-Freudian analysis of it. 

AD: Right. To use these, we’re using these broad terms, Western civilization and all that stuff. I know you’re also a fan of David Graeber and he’s recently, I mean, obviously he’s passed away now, but that most recent book, I think it’s the The Dawn of Everything…First and foremost, what we think of as Western Enlightenment is not a purely Western quote unquote thing. It’s a synthesis of deep cultural interplay between societies, many of which we do not consider part of Western societies, so the enlightenment is really something that I think is far, I think it maybe even gets into that cultural or sort of shared imaginal space is sort of what I’m saying, the thing that happens that generates culture. But I think what I mean to say is less about death drive specifically and more just about the awareness of the thing. We are denying an awareness that it’s happening on some level, and the inability to articulate it, prevents people from being able to mourn it, and then the denial of the mourning that needs to take place, what’s happening to the rational. To the natural world that ends up feeding into a cycle that perpetuates it is what I think. I just mean partially, one way I can clear this up is I used to think when I first saw Idiocracy, I thought it was the funniest movie I’d ever seen, and then I went through a long phase where I thought that it was a mean-spirited movie that didn’t jive with my values, and now I’m like, it’s the funniest movie I’ve ever seen. 

William Tyler: No, I kind of had the same process with it. I thought the whole, it’s promoting eugenics angle was kind of like, no, it’s actually just a satire. People said a lot of mean stuff about Jonathan Swift and Dr. Strangelove. I do want to touch on this. Even if we don’t end up talking about the record, which I don’t care. This is actually relevant. 

AD: It’s really good, listeners.

William Tyler: No, I didn’t mean it like that because it hits on a personal level, this at some point in, I’ve been doing a lot of, I would say, with varying degrees of success recovery work in the last few years, and there was one book I read, and of course I can’t remember what it was now, but something about being self-aware of your problem, whatever you want to lay, the character defects or your addiction or your pathologies or whatever, being aware of them by itself isn’t really much of a victory. It actually can make the problem worse. 

You probably have to be aware of what it is before you can change it, just like anything in life. But I would say to my own intellectual curiosity, that definitely borders on the masochistic sometimes, and I also don’t know about it as much as other people in our world that really, really follow it. Daniel Bachman is a great example when it comes to climate crisis. He’s really, really up on it. I think a lot of us choose to look away. Most people don’t thinking about things like climate crisis or death or pain or existential. I just happen to be one of those people who has the kind of brain, I have obsessive compulsive disorder. When I get in a negative cognitive loop cycle. I mean, it can last hours, and I’ve tried to channel that on my own and just to try to learn as much as possible. But it’s kind the more you learn about what’s going on with certain situations, especially when it comes to planetary things. I don’t even know if depressing is the right word, because it’s like that implies something’s being done wrong to you. It’s more just like it is a different kind of powerlessness that just feels stupid almost.

AD: It’s like apocalyptic stupidity. It’s a revelation of how stupid it is. 

William Tyler: That’s why I thought Don’t Look Up was the best movie of the last four or five years probably in terms of what people are going to watch in 20 years, and that’s what it’s about. 

AD: Another satire that really pissed people off and some of the people who would be progressive or whatever term you want to use. A lot of people were really annoyed by that movie. 

William Tyler: I would challenge you or anyone listening to this or whatever, and I really mean this, name one satirical thing that didn’t piss off people. Obviously anybody who’s a conservative, they don’t have a sense of humor, or if they do, it’s just mean, there are not funny conservatives. Maybe by today’s standards, some of these people like George Carlin probably would’ve been canceled or whatever. My point is there is no classic satire, whether you’re going back to Gulliver’s Travels or like I said, Dr. Strangelove or Idiocracy or Don’t Look Up or Putney Swope or Network. We could keep going. They pissed everybody off, especially progressives and Ricky Gervais’s speech at the Golden Globes right before lockdown. I think about that a lot. I was like, oh, yeah, he nailed it. He made that whole room uncomfortable, and he was really funny doing it. I think the whole point of satire is to make people uncomfortable. 

AD: It should be. That has to be a part of it. I’m finishing this book, I’m almost done listening to it through the library app, Libby, but it’s about the UK comic book character Judge Dredd, who was created as a satire of American authoritarian policing. 

William Tyler: Oh, I didn’t know that. I just know the movie version .

AD: With Stallone or the much better Dredd with Karl Urban? 

William Tyler: No, sadly, Jason, I’m thinking about the Stallone one. That was in the mid-‘90s. Your parents drop you off at the multiplex and you meet up with a bunch of your buddies and watch some terrible movie together and then go get pizza. That’s all I remember about Judge Dredd.

AD: 100%. The book is this great. It’s by one of the editors’ of 2000 ads, the magazine that Dredd appears in, but it’s like a very verso book style. Examination of the term that they use over and over again is the politics of policing. The state has the ability to kill you, and if the state kills, you certainly deserved death because the power of the state to kill you was enacted, and therefore you had to be deserving of it on some level. But anyway, part of what makes it so funny is that I remember being a kid wanting to go see Judge Dredd. I’m just a few years younger than you, and there was no cineplex in the town where I grew up, Coolidge, and I remember going to the Safeway grocery store and using the photocopier that was available to photocopy pages of a Wizard Magazine about the movie Judge Dredd. And then putting it back on the rack. I couldn’t afford it and just paying for the copies and then pouring over an article about the movie Judge Dredd, because I wanted to see it so bad eventually. It’s one of those things where I saw it much later and it was like, this is a terrible movie. 

It’s not a big deal. But I do remember actually being a kid reading it, and I was think like, I was a thinker as a kid to a fault. And I’m just sitting there stewing in my own brain about, “Can it be moral for somebody to be the judge, jury, and executioner like Judge Dredd is, does that mean the Punisher is also a problem? Am I experiencing the problematics of superhero policing and all these things? So this is a great book, but part of what it gets into and hits on what you’re saying is there are limits to satire, even if it’s great satire because it can’t be a complete moral statement in some ways because you almost need to, or rather that it’s not that it can’t be a complete moral statement, it’s just there’s always going to be complicating factors and incorrectly leveled levels of satire. It’s like we went too hard in this one direction and we kind of overshot and missed the point of what we were doing, but that’s just what happens with satires. 

But that thing you’re saying, the ability of art to make us uncomfortable, Time Indefinite is still a William Tyler record, and by that, I mean there are parts that just make me tear up. They’re so beautiful. “Held” is mind blowing. It just feels like you hit “An Ascent” feel, from Apollo: Atmospheres and Soundtracks. It’s just so beautiful and there are lots of moments on the record, but there are also moments of abrasion of abstraction and more moments, I’m saying, than some people might be used to from you. So I’m saying in a weird way, this record requires that you sit with some discomfort in certain ways. I have to imagine that that was part of the fact that because danced around it, I haven’t meant to dance around it, but you’ve been pretty open about being in recovery and having struggles with specifically alcohol in the pandemic era, and it became something that you were having more trouble with maybe than you were before. I don’t know if that’s how you’d put it or if it just, whatever. It reached a different point and you’ve been in this process of untangling all of that. So I guess what I mean is I’m curious to hear you reflect on the ways in which this record, did it make you uncomfortable? How did this one push you, and how has it tied into that sense of recovering who you are? 

William Tyler: I think that there are certain textures on the record that are very consciously meant to make people uncomfortable. I mean, the first sound that starts it out starts the album out, which is this really loud, abrasive sample I made years ago of a record skipping. That’s a conscious decision. I always wanted to start an album with something that kind of made people probably think there was something wrong with their stereo. 

AD: That’s something I love about those last couple Low records was the first time I played them, I was like, I’m pretty sure that it’s supposed to sound like this, but I don’t know for sure. 

William Tyler: Dude, totally. When they pivoted in that direction, it was like, I mean, I already kind of knew they were one of the best bands in the world, but these guys are so next level, the way they deal with sound and what it can do emotionally. But I don’t know. So it’s hard for me to comment too much on the last five years of addiction, recovery, whatever that carousel is, it’s something I’m very much still actively untangling or dealing with. It has been a very nonlinear process for me, and I’ve gone through a lot of the things that people do when they have a problem with a substance or any kind of mental health pathology. I’ve been to treatment twice actually. I’ve done a lot of group therapy. I’ve been involved, I’ve been in and out of AA. 

I’ve been trying to find my church in the recovery community because I just haven’t, that’s the short answer. But I do believe that recovery is not something you can do by yourself. It has to have a spiritual component to it. I think even if that spiritual component is just radical self-actualization, and I actually know some people specifically who left AA because of the more dogmatic parts of it and there are parts of it that have always made me uncomfortable. Not the religious aspect as much as the kind of patriarchal, dogmatic aspect of it, but it does work for a lot of people, and it’s a very kind forgiving movement that has saved a lot of people’s lives, but much like mainstream Christianity, it’s like something I was raised around that just has never emotionally resonated with me with in a transformative way is the short answer. And I think that alcohol is a really tricky one because it’s a central nervous system depressant and it’s an anesthetic, so it does physiologically cause extreme anxiety and semi-convulsive nerve behavior when you’re withdrawing from it because it’s a poison, but when you’re consuming, it tends to deaden your reaction. 

So if you’re dealing with extreme anxiety, it’s pretty effective in its first wave. And I know this is all kind of like, duh. But, it really is. So the fact is this record, I started working on it with Jake Davis, who was my collaborator on the whole thing, who’s a Nashville guy, and one of the really great things that came out of the pandemic honestly was just getting to be friends with Jake, but we started working on it in December of 2020. It took a long time to finish. And through a lot of those periods, whether I was being creative or not, I was pretty numbed out or I was in a cycle of either being pretty numbed out and able to—I’m really have to be careful how I talk about this, I don’t want to romanticize anything about substance use, but I would be lying if I said that parts of this record did come from me being kind of fucked up in one way or the other. But then like I said, the other side of it, the sort of the regret, the guilt, the cortisol, all of the awful things that alcohol does to you once it stops working, especially if it’s chronic, you’re kind of living in this perpetual state of wanting to numb out and then having extreme anxiety and extreme awareness that makes it even harder to not want to numb out again. 

So, long story short, for people like me, it’s quicksand and I actually have accepted that, but I’m very nonjudgmental about it. The whole aspect of it that brings out violence and anger and all of that stuff, I think there is a component to that drug that is certainly what Jung thought and what a lot of union people have thought, and there’s a lot of union stuff in it in Alcoholics Anonymous that it actually does lower your spiritual bandwidth, that it starts letting in dark forces, like actual evil elements. I actually do believe that because I’ve experienced what that kind of darkness feels like. I don’t really, not into external anger or violence or anything but just self-hate or lack of self-love that I feel like there is something to this that it is probably neurological, and the longer I engage with it, the more interested I am in just how much brain chemistry. Because just kind of round out this thought, I’m convinced I’ve had long COVID, the first time I got COVID was July of 2021, and the circumstances around it were just very unfortunate, just from a practical level. But without getting into that, I sort of never felt the same after it. And I’m starting to work with a psychiatrist who’s more into mapping brain science and alcohol, COVID, certain things just attack your brain in a way that kind of makes you not permanently but perpetually depressed.

AD: I don’t mean to cut you off, I’m sorry. But I definitely hear what you’re saying. I probably can’t help but bring it back to David Lynch in Twin Peaks right now because I just finished a rewatch of Twin Peaks: The Return. Which I’m convinced is not just one of the truly great works of art of our time, but also maybe one of the most oracular and legitimately totally spiritually revelatory texts. And something that I thought so much about is I remember being younger and figuring out some way to square the idea in my head that Bob was a metaphor more than anything, and Leland Palmer did those evil things, but Bob was sort of a metaphor for that thing that those dark forces that come and take us, of course, watching the show again and then watching The Return, he makes it pretty clear. Bob’s like a real dude at one point, the guy with the green glove has to punch Bob’s orb spirit, all this stuff. 

But it makes me think a lot about that thing of violence, and we’ve talked a little bit about imagination, but it’s like the ultimate breakdown of imagination. That’s when there’s nothing left. And so I think about this idea of the violence that has to be done to a person over and over and over again to break down that spiritual thing that would allow them to not be a violent person. So then it becomes just this. And so I think about the violence that we do to ourselves obviously is the violence that precedes the violence we do to others. So first and foremost, I want to just tell you how I really appreciate your discussion about recovery because I actually think that the way it gets discussed certainly in pop media is so often just way too convenient and narratively structured. You know what I mean? I had a problem, I figured it out and now I’m better. It’s not to say that there’s not any truth to that. There is. That’s part of the story. There’s some that’s true, but it’s also, like you said, it’s an ongoing thing. It’s not narratively satisfying in the same way that we want things to be sometimes. 

William Tyler: I love that you brought Lynch up because obviously it’s very relevant right now with his passing. I’m really into whatever the union analysis of the situation is, largely thanks to my mom. My mom runs the Nashville-y group, so she’s a total head about Carl Jung and all that.

AD: The first time anybody’s ever said that sentence on a podcast. ‘My mom’s a total head about Carl Jung.’

William Tyler: But there’s something that, I don’t know if we really have time to get into it, but I do want to throw that out there because very relevant to the way I see this album. It’s dreamlike in a way that is not supposed to be scary or beautiful in linear ways, which is one of the things that I love so much about Lynch’s films and Tarkovsky films and plenty of other people, whatever, that’s a whole other discussion. But there’s just that sense of you could watch Blue Velvet and the Straight Story, and absolutely, they’re both incredibly bizarre movies for different reasons. Herzog obviously is another example, but that is something I wanted to get with this record. Is this more like, “Is this friendly? Is this dark?” And it probably did come out of a lot of my own experiences with dealing with psychological stuff and trying to get into dream life and acknowledging the role that drugs have played in modifying or whatever, just changing my brain chemistry. But I think that there’s something that with recovery specifically, I think that there’s a very specific type of movie about alcoholism in the United States, and there’s one that’s just totally tragic, Days of Wine and Roses, Lost Weekend. Then there’s this kind of new format like Flight and the Jeff Bridges one, Crazy Heart, I think that’s what it’s called. 

I’m sure there’s more. I’m kind of forgetting. There’s a Ben Affleck one that wasn’t very good, but we had to watch it in rehab, about him coaching a basketball team. All of these movies share this thing where it’s like the three acts of the guy in active abuse and denial, but he’s charming, but he kind of gets his life back, but then it all falls apart at the end. And the fourth act in the denouement, like total acknowledgement, total surrender. He goes to rehab, he goes to jail, and it fades out on a sunset. And you’re meant to assume, “OK, problem solved.” And that is not the way it works for a lot of people, including myself. And there’s actually a film that I encourage people to watch called Another Round. It’s a Danish film, that is about alcoholism, but it’s very nonlinear. Like some of the people in the movie succumb to it. Other people kind of still are able to engage with alcohol in a joyful way. And it really, really captures to me as somebody who has a problem with alcohol, it captures better than almost any film I’ve seen, the more blissful parts of alcohol, the way we celebrate it as a culture, and then of course the parts that are really dark and the ugly parts of it, but it’s not linear in the same way as these Hollywood versions of it.

 And I think the Hollywood version is valuable, just a Bible story, but it’s just not necessarily the way it works in real life for a lot of people. And I think  has to be room made for, and I’m not saying this to make excuses for my own experience, I’m just saying it just because I don’t want to be on record as saying, I don’t think a lot of things, especially recovery and spiritual growth or whatever you want to call them, they’re not linear. That gets back to the original thing about the questioning, the nature of time in a really quantum way. 

AD: Absolutely. And I think that the addiction to a certain kind of linearity is another one of those reasons why our imagination is so stifled right now, because that sort of end of history notion that infected the brain, it’s kind of like, okay, so the linearity is just going to continue getting better and better forever, I guess. 

William Tyler: Well, it’s the infinite growth paradigm, the thing which is obviously false, but it’s central to the idea of western capitalism and western imperialism.

AD: It’s so essential, and yet it is such an unnatural idea. We take it for truth in this country and unquestioningly adhere to it even when we’re aware of its problems in a lot of ways, but that’s not natural. There is no such thing as unlimited growth, and there will be a cost for anything. And that’s why when we were talking about AI, you talked about the environmental impact, and it’s like I couldn’t agree more, but we also need to start applying that to everything. It’s not just AI that we need to start worrying about, it’s environmental impact. We got to talk about factory farming. We got to talk about the war machine that is fueling the same drive. We need to talk about how all of that has vast environmental impact and start to really truly think about it. But to get back to this idea of time indefinite and this record and the nonlinearity of it, I love first and foremost that you mentioned that it’s kind of a dream record in a lot of ways. Some of the songs “A Dream, A Flood,” “Howling at the Second Moon,” “Star of Hope.” There’s an nocturnal imagery there, but the record’s not necessarily like, oh, you fell asleep and you’re in a dream. It’s this thing that drifts in and out between those zones, and it feels hypnagogic in not the chillgaze sense…I mean chillwave. 

William Tyler: Dude, that can totally be a genre, “chillgaze.” I think that’s a new one. I think I learned what vapor wave was six months ago. So yeah, I’m not one to talk about genres. 

AD: We played with Rose City Band the other night, and I joked that I think that they were going to come up on stage next, and I think they’re going to choogle tonight. And then I asked one of the guys in the band, I was like, are you guys going to choogle and he goes, “I don’t really know what that means, man.” I was just like, well, I’m a rock critic. I’m not used to question. If I use the term, it means it’s real. I’m right. 

William Tyler: Also, just as an aside, I love how no one involved in a genre likes being called that.

AD: Yeah, it’s so funny. 

William Tyler: Will Ackerman and Harold Budd were always like, “Man, fuck new age. I hate that term.” It’s like, dude, you made a lot of money off that. 

AD: Steve Roach, when I talked with him, he was like, “I never liked the term. But then I think he had the sort of sense to say, then again, “When Tower Records invented it, in order to shelve my records somewhere, it benefited me very well.”

William Tyler: I think I’m very consciously at a transitional point in my artistic life with this record, and honestly with things that are coming out later this year and next year that are going to surprise people. And I’m trying to pivot away from whatever the algorithm thinks post-Takoma, Windham Hill guitar music is, but obviously I consciously engaged with that at a deep, deep level when I started making solo music. And it’s okay. It’s all about reconfiguration and recontextualization and a composer friend of mine, Judd Greenstein, talks about genre fluidity, and I think that’s really important to the whole thing of just the labels do help in the tower records mentality or the Dewey Decimal library system, and if that helps you sell a record, I mean, this is what we’re trying to do here, but to me, this is why I still do love the internet. People who you follow, like Joshua Kim from Tone Glow who are just these encyclopedias of the last 30 years of micro genres, and just you’re like, how does this person know so much about music and film or dark ambient, perfect example, 

Drew from Matmos. He’s one of the people I still follow on Twitter, Josh and Drew, and people like that are some of the only reasons. I’m still on Twitter, by the way. But anyway, Drew was posting about dark ambient, and I was like, okay, I kind of knew that was a thing, but this is kind of how I feel about certain songs on time indefinite, so I should definitely really investigate it more, and if there’s a way for there to be something that’s sort of blissful and really ugly at the same time, that is what I associate with “dark ambient”. But this is not a record that, I mean, other than, there’s very, very consonant moments on it. You pointed out the last song “Held,”but there’s other things where this is not something you would put on in a LA sound bath unless it was like a full spectrum psilocybin sound bath where you’re going to run the whole gamut of emotions. 

AD: It’s probably too late, and I’m sure Psychic Hotline already has a sticker ready for the front of the record, but if not, you might want to get “a fully immersive psilocybin sound bath” on the sticker. To your point, I think that’s part of the reason why Lynch always ends up being such a touchstone for me, same as Herzog. I put both of them in this same category, and it’s because the full expression of the human experience is both blissful and horrifying, and horror is the cost of beauty. In some senses, we have to understand the relationship between those things, but part of what I like about say, Twin Peaks, the Return is that it is both dread-soaked and beautiful. You know what I mean, in these different times. And so I guess dark ambient, I think of something like that. And so much of what we are in a very strange time where stuff gets grouped kind of incongruously, right? Not all instrumental music is the same thing,  it’s like exploring different stuff, but an algorithm. You know what I mean, than it actually is. So all I’m saying is when you’re ready to drop your collaboration with Lustmord or something like that, wish I’ll be here for it. I went down the dark ambient train following watching First Reformed, and it was Lustmord soundtrack that got me.

William Tyler: You know what? I love that movie. And I did not realize that there was a correlation there.

AD: I mean, I don’t know if the soundtrack counts as dark ambient, but he often gets classified as.

William Tyler: I mean, yeah. Also, just as an aside, it’s really ironic because you bring up Paul Schrader film, Jake Davis, my collaborator, co-producer on this record, he just engineered the music for the latest Paul Schrader film, and he had a lot of funny stories about him. 

AD: Oh, Canada?

William Tyler: Matthew from Phosphorescent, him and his partner did the music, and Jake engineered it. But Paul Schrader is just like everything you expect he would be from his internet presence. It’s like he really is that grumpy, repressed, Midwestern Lutheran, obviously with a great sense of humor and a lot of humanity. I think these movies are wildly underrated to me. First Reformed, Blue Collar, and Taxi Driver are just such humanistic movies about evil and good. I don’t think it’s a great movie, but the premise of it. Yeah, I think he’s really underrated in that department. 

AD: I think he’s deeply underrated. I still haven’t seen Oh Canada. Matthew was on the podcast and talked about the soundtrack and talked about working with Paul, but I still need to see that one. But I think that First Reformed, is probably my favorite movie of however long. Really mind blowing. But I liked The Card Counter a lot too. I haven’t seen Master Gardener, but I liked The Card Counter. So in terms of Paul Schrader, late style, Paul Schrader, we’re really living in a golden moment. But William, it’s funny. I was so looking forward to this talk, and I’m so glad that we did it. I had a great time talking with you, but I realize an hour and seven minutes in is not when I should start asking questions about God. So we’ll have to have you come back and we’ll do that. I don’t think we get into God in an hour. I don’t think we’ll be able to finish talking about God in the next two or three minutes. 

William Tyler: No, let’s just make sure that the fine people behind the scenes at Aquarium Drunkard and the fine people that support it would indulge us with another conversation sometime in the next few months. I think it might be fun. I will say though, because he’s a friend, that really does mean a lot to me in a lot of ways, aesthetically and just intellectually. My friend Douglas Mcgowan, who was my housemate for four years out here in LA, he would be one of the best experts on how you contextualize new age music from the pre-revival, whatever the OG wave of it was. And he curated the I Am the Center Box and a lot of other projects, but he has this great way of putting it. There’s a really great lecture he delivered on new age music that I think is still on YouTube somewhere. I’ll try to find it. 

AD: The Experience Music Project or something like that?

William Tyler: Yeah, because I just remember going around to thrift stores in West Hollywood in 2009, and he was buying cassettes, and he was like, dude, this is going to be big someday. And I was like, you’re totally insane. But he was right. But his way of putting it, which I think is very apropos to the way we talk about time, is his definition of new age. The new age aesthetic was nostalgia for the future. And I think that is perfectly what draws me to whatever this kind of art we’re talking about is. 

AD: And that taps into that nonlinear thing. And I think that music gives us, either we know it’s happening or maybe it’s happening on some level that’s deeper than our conscious awareness. But I do think that the experience of art and the way recordings specifically come into the world, there’s a time dilation that’s happening always. You know what I mean? And something that changes over the time you work on it. I think some sense of that time gets into the work, in some intangible way. And I feel like with this record, it’s beautiful and it’s got these moments that are unsettling, and then they give way to really transcendent moments that kind of feel like both at the same time. And it’s been great hanging out and talking with you about it, man. It’s always so good. And I can’t wait to hear more of some of this stuff that you’re talking about coming down the pipeline, and very much excited to have those surprises on the way as well. 

William Tyler: Well, Jason, I appreciate it. We always have a good talk. 

AD: We always do. And if Douglas Mcgowan is listening, I do know that I need to do a proper Douglas McGowan interview for this podcast. Because every time I’ve ever had a conversation with him, it would’ve been a great podcast because a really thoughtful and smart guy who I think help open a lot of hearts to the new age thing in the right way, and I think is kind of doing the good work. Douglas needs to be on here. And maybe we’ll, underlay all just sounds from the iOS app, that Numero Group. The Environments app, which is when we did that was talked about on this podcast. 

William Tyler: That’s right. No, I remember that. Well, you should definitely have him on. Thanks Jason. Thank you for making the time as well. 

  

 

 
 Posted on April 23, 2025April 23, 2025Podcast William Tyler
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });