# Transmissions :: The Weather Station (2025)

**Transmissions — The Weather Station (2025)** · _2025-03-26_ · by Jason Woodbury · `podcast`
**Tags:** The Weather Station, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/03/26/transmissions-the-weather-station-2025/)

## Body

Call it “brain fog,” call it “attention economy burnout,” call it the dregs of late capitalism: however you label it, Tamara Lindeman has been feeling it. With “Neon Signs,” our favorite song from her 2025 album as The Weather Station, Humanhood—out now on Fat Possum Records—she gives names and shapes to the sense of dread so many of us feel permeating our daily existence. 

“I’ve gotten used to feeling like I’m crazy—or just lazy,” she sings in her signature flinty voice at the start of the song, articulating the ennui of being stuck in a cosmic rut. Unending conflict, climate anxiety, and the always-on buzz of the internet—all of it has rendered so many of us inert. But the pulsing piano, swirling flutes and strings, and insistent beat do powerful work here, adding forward motion to Lindeman’s existential angst.

A protest song of a stripe, “Neon Signs” feels like a spiritual update of The Who’s “We Don’t Get Fooled Again”—a cautionary tale wrapped up in defiance. Untangling the politics of want and need, of trust and fear, of lust and genuine connection, Lindeman wanders a glittering landscape in which every flashing light demands notice and every notification could single doom. Is cutting through all that noise possible? “Neon Signs” doesn’t make it clear, but Lindeman tips her hand in favor of the possibility of human flourishing in spite of it all—if only we can get honest with ourselves: “I swear to god I saw real love once/But nothing needs you so badly as a lie, so lonely, drifting, unmoored from real life/if nobody believes it all it can do is die.” This week on Transmissions, she joins host Jason Woodbury to discuss Humanhood—the album, sure, but also the concept of what makes us human. 

Transmissions :: The Weather Station (2025)

Next week on Transmissions: The Mekons 



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Tamara Lindeman: I’m not in my normal space either, but you get the bedroom view. 

Aquarium Drunkard: I appreciate you taking the time to join us once again on Transmissions. It’s so great to have you back.

Tamara Lindeman: Yeah, it’s lovely to be back.

AD: Let’s see, so we talked in 2021. Has anything happened since then?

Tamara Lindeman: Oh God. What hasn’t happened since then?

AD: That’s a really good question. I was listening back to that interview and I was struck by how I heard myself both saying things that I’m like, oh yeah, I still feel that way, or I still understand the world that way. But then there’s other stuff where I was like, no, 2021 Jason, he didn’t know what was on the way. And I guess maybe none of us did, but I feel like this new record really addresses the moment beautifully.

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, thank you. Thank you very much. Yeah. Yeah, it’s weird. The record is pretty dark, and so I know what I was talking about at the time, but it’s weird where the record feels, I almost feel—this is going to make me sound crazy—but it does feel like almost like a expression of something that was in the collective or something that sometimes it feels like you experience something ahead of time.

AD: I think especially for art, right? A million things come to mind. I think about how Yankee Hotel Foxtrot by Wilco recorded, and had written all of that before 9-11, and yet in the aftermath of 9-11, so many things seemed like it was foretelling something or whatever. So I do wonder if art has the ability to sort of read the room as it were when it comes to the collective unconscious and channel that stuff. I don’t think that sounds crazy at all, but you might be on a particularly accepting podcast for that sort of view. You know what I mean?

Tamara Lindeman: Yes. I’ve come to the right place.

AD: You’ve come to the right place. It’s funny though that you mentioned that because when “Neon Signs” dropped last year, late last year, I think that was the first single from the record…When that came out, I just remember a feeling for me of a huge, kind of weirdly a kind of relief to hear that song in a strange way because it was like, I like when artists write about what’s happening, but it’s very difficult to do without seeming didactic or silly or seeming too literal or something. But there was something about that song where you were just able to really articulate something that I think a lot of people have been feeling. And I know that this record comes from a very personal place for you, but that sort of place where the personal and the universal sort of sync up is a really interesting one. And I feel like with that song in particular, I hadn’t heard anybody address the sort of “attention economy” thing with as much clarity as that particular song.

Tamara Lindeman: Thank you. Yeah.

AD: There are a lot of neon signs. There’s so much that can distract us or calls to us, and I feel like with that song, obviously you were talking about a lot of different ways that sort of manifests in the world, but one of the things that struck me also was the way it sounds, the actual composition, the way the band works on this record. And so I wondered if, to start off, maybe we could start off by talking a little bit about that. I have a tendency to focus on your lyrics, but sonically, I was really struck by this record.

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, thank you.

AD: Did this one start differently than others? I mean, was this a different approach for you or a refinement of an approach when it comes to the sound? You mentioned the darkness of the record, and it is a pretty dark record, but sonically, it doesn’t always feel like a dark record. Was that an idea? 

Tamara Lindeman: Yeah. I mean, I think that just speaks to…I was coming out of a time, and then the making of the record was really great in a lot of ways. And I do feel like it was a refinement of a process. I went back to the same studio where I made Ignorance and How Is It I Should Look At The Stars and it was going in with this knowledge of I know how to do this now, some of the same people, this band having learned from both of those records to be able to be rolling when people are finding their parts and finding the song because there’s all this magic that happens and trusting the musicians. I think I got a lot better on this record of just putting the pieces together ahead of who will have these instincts in the room, and then really just trying to set people free.

And I really love the record because I just hear the spirits of all these musicians and all of their interesting minds sort of tangling with the material. And so that was a joy. And then I really had thought a lot about wanting to do a lot of sound collage and kind of breaking things apart and manipulating things. And that ended up being slightly less forward on the record than I thought, but it’s definitely in there. So I did a lot of work that didn’t end up on the record. But then the other joy of this record was working with Joseph Lorge, who mixed it and is just a beautiful mixer, so thoughtful, so detailed. And yeah, I give him a lot of credit with trying to find a way to mix this record where you hear all of these voices, all these different instruments. And together we did a lot of shaping of we’re going from this very singular sound to this massive cornucopia of sounds back down to the small zooming in and out. We had a lot of great creative moments. So yeah, just a lot of beautiful people worked on the record.

AD: I feel like there’s a buoyancy to the music aspect of it and that it helps keep it moving forward in this way where so many of the lyrics are sort of talking about, man, I don’t know. I don’t want to be reductive or whatever. You know what I mean? But so many of the lyrics are talking about feeling stuck in a certain sense. And again, that’s so deeply and personally relatable, but the music doesn’t feel stuck. It feels especially unstuck is what I was trying to get. The music sort of flutters around. In her review for Aquarium Drunkard, Jennifer Kelly talked about how she felt like your voice was, I don’t want to say deemphasized, she didn’t say deemphasized, but that your voice is part of the larger patchwork of sounds and the larger sonic collage, and not always necessarily right up in the front of the speakers the way that we might sort of expect. So I feel like that collage aspect is really accentuated, and I like that you have these instrumentals that kind of break it up and add little textures. Are those sort of nods to that sound design thing that you’re talking about? Were those things that were drawn out of the sessions and either manipulated or recontextualized, or are those all written as an idea of wanting to break things up?

Tamara Lindeman: Yeah, that was something I definitely went in with was this idea of interstitials and wanting to feel like it was an album, wanting to feel like watching a film. You walk in, you sit down and you’re taken on a journey and everything’s intentional and not just like, here’s a song. It’s not the right thing for 2025. That’s not what the world wants.

AD: You mean in terms of albums?

Tamara Lindeman: The world is so set up for songs right now, but I just wanted it to be an album and I wanted the music to flow continuously. And yeah, we talked about that with the band, this idea of, I’ve said this elsewhere, but islands in the stream, like the music, you’re in a stream and then you get out on an island, which is one of the songs, and then you kind of are swept back into the stream into the next island. And we talked about that even musically. The band really took to that idea of, is this an island or is this a stream?

AD: I like that.

Tamara Lindeman: And do you feel secure or not?

AD: I mean, that’s really fascinating to think about. I mean, your records, really with Ignorance kind of forward, there’s been an emphasis on rhythm and an emphasis on certain textures. And on this one, I mean, I’m picking up on all sorts of greats. I mean, so many cool drum things happening on this record. Especially “Mirror,”; I  think “Mirror” is my favorite track.

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, thanks.

AD: I just love that kind of almost baggy beat kind of thing going on that’s happening. And at the same time, there’s a real sense of jazz to the record as well. I’m curious, as a songwriter, and I don’t know how it works for you, do you often hear some sense of the actual production or the production you want to go for? Does any of that sort of inform you as you’re working on the song itself, or is it a situation where that’s more about the chords and the lyrics and then you take it into the studio and then the next part happens? I’m curious if there’s an inkling, if you feel like you have inklings? 

Tamara Lindeman: Yeah, honestly, not really. No. The writing is one thing. Sometimes I’ve had an idea for a beat or something that forms the melody for sure, and sometimes I’ve written with a drum machine or a beat. But yeah, it’s almost like the writing is one thing, and then imagining the record is sort of the second thing. I do a lot of imagining and trying to kind of magpie together, the disparate elements, the different colors. I had a four hour playlist on this one that was very, I mean, it was all over the place.

AD: In terms of sort of sonic reference points?

Tamara Lindeman: Yes sonic reference points.

AD: Tell me about some of the stuff that’s on it.

Tamara Lindeman: I had this reference point of British folk that’s in there, and then I had this other reference point of I don’t really even listen to hip-hop, but the freeness, if you listen to Mr. Morale [And the Big Steppers], it’s insane. The choices and the sonics are crazy. I mean, it’s not like it shows up that much in the record, but I think that informs me to be a bit more bold and courageous and try something that is not at all within the realm of “singer songwriter Americana,” I think. And then just “rhythm.” I was listening to Theo Perish. I fell in love with that ML Buch record. Yeah, just trying to gather. I really like gathering widely and not being too caught up in how that needs to relate. I was really obsessed actually with the Rosalía record when I was putting this record together, which is not at all in the record, but I think it was the courageousness of form and sound.

AD: Yeah, no, that’s really cool. And I mean, I do hear maybe not straight up Rosalía but I mean, I can hear what you’re talking about, and I think that boldness is there and that sort of like you mentioned, Mr. Morale And The Big Steppers, the Kendrick Lamar record where, [train noises in background] sorry, this train is, this train is absolutely ruining my question. The only problem with this train, sometimes I do these interviews here at my job when we’re done. The only problem with the train is that once it starts going, I can’t stop paying attention to it.

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, yeah. As it’s going by.

AD: Yeah, as it’s going by. Actually, I took my Zoom recorder out and made a field recording of a train earlier today. But anyway, you mentioned that there are a lot of voices on the record, and I know you’re talking specifically about musical contributions from other people, but I also feel like one of my favorite things about Kendrick is the weird way he does his different voices. He’s got his different Kendricks in a record, right? And there’s the kind of huskier sounding Kendrick, then there’s the really thin voice alien Kendrick. There’s these all different Kendricks. And I wondered if you felt like that was something that, you’re a tremendous singer, but there are a lot of times on this record where you are doing something almost more like talking at least every now and then. I wonder if that was something that for you, that courageousness extended even to that idea of maybe I’m just going to say this part, you know what I mean, versus come up with a melody.

Tamara Lindeman: Yeah, definitely. I think that I did feel that, and that was something that happened last minute with the song “Humanhood” and “Ribbon,” these choruses of extra voices that came together in these little spoken asides. It felt like when I made the self-titled record and I was like, I can say I don’t have to have just this slow meter of a song, I can just jam in more. Why did no one tell me there was this extra door over here? I mean, I think I really admire the creativity in hip-hop. It’s so incredible. And I wish that I could sing in other voices. I mean, I think that is something that speaks to the multiplicity of people. And I think on my record, like these extra voices, it just lets me expand a bit. And part of it came from feeling like I was just frustrated with the way that the melodies were just so not boring, but they’re repetitive as melodies of pop songs are, and I needed more real estate or something. So yeah, your question almost makes me wish I’d pushed it even further. But that’s how I would respond. I’m like, oh, I should have done something different. But yeah, I’m always looking for a broader canvas, I guess.

AD: Yeah, I mean, I think that that comes through and it’s not just looking for a broader canvas is one thing, but almost feeling like you need that broader canvas because you want to express more is what I’m picking up on. And I feel like you’re trying to talk about a lot of really big things on this record, and it doesn’t feel like a thing where it gets lost in itself, which I guess is something that sometimes I think can happen when people are writing really personal records where, I don’t know, I feel like there’s always space being made for the listener on this one as well. And that’s exciting. I think I had read a quote from you where you said something like the last record was the moon to Ignorance’s sun. How does this one fit in celestially. Is this a cloud? What are we talking about here? Is this a satellite? Have you considered it, it does feel like a piece with those records in a certain sense, it’s you marshaling similar realizations or sort of working in a newer mode,. I’m curious how you would classify it. 

Tamara Lindeman: I’ve never thought to assign an element to it, but what I thought of when you just mentioned that was there’s something very dirty about this album. I do feel a lot of gravel and grit, but I also feel water. So maybe it’s like a shoreline. It’s the meeting of the two. I mean, it feels very water and very dirt. It’s funny because I’ve been returning to that as I’ve been thinking about the show where it’s funny that on the record cover, I just had this instinct of wanting to go towards rocks in contrast to Ignorance, which is all the beautiful branches, I wanted stone, and then I wanted water. And we are on the water in the album. You can’t see it because it was dark, but the fabric becomes almost the water of the image. And anyway, you just got me thinking about it.

AD: It’s a really striking cover.

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, thanks. Yeah, I love it. I’m so proud of it.

AD: I was listening to our previous interview and we spent a lot of time talking about the mirror suit that you were wearing for I think some of the video stuff for Ignorance. And I found myself thinking obviously a lot about mirrors in regards to this record because there’s the song “Mirror,” but also there’s a sort of mirror thing happening on the cover as well. And I think you said there’s a lyric where in “Mirror” you say, “Oh, but God is a mirror. Everything is,” and for me personally, thinking as much about climate change as I do, I find that God, the idea of God, the character of God. He’s interesting. God’s interesting when it comes to climate change. And I’ve started, basically, I wrote a lyric where I tried to say something along the lines of “God is what’s happening.” 

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, interesting.

AD: I find myself thinking a lot about that sort of God is say, let’s say a force that is beyond our control and has the power to snuff us out or preserve us or whatever. So thinking about that, but I’m curious about that specific line, God is a mirror and how that sort of came to you and where you were coming from when it came to that line, because I think it’s pretty resonant. And also maybe just a touch under explored in our culture, this notion of projection and what we see.

Tamara Lindeman: Yeah, I mean, it’s interesting because I’ve done a lot of interviews by now and almost no one asks about that line, which I think is interesting because it’s kind of the scariest one. And I understand I would be scared about it too. But I’m grateful for your question because I feel like it’s coming from the place that I’m thinking of it in that I’ve never been, I wasn’t raised in a religion, so I never really have experienced the belief in a Christian God or a monotheistic sort of perspective. And the line just occurred to me like everything else, it just was on the page. And then I’m like, do I believe that? Is that real? How do I feel about this? And I really had to think it over because the first connotation I thought it was saying was the idea of a God is a mirror of yourself—a Jungian way of thinking might say both kinds of projection, whether dark or light is about something that is in you.

But I didn’t feel like that’s what the song was saying. I didn’t feel like it was about a mirror like vanity. I felt that the song or what I resonate with in that lyric myself is something more along the lines of what you’re talking about of, if I was to say that I have a sense of spirituality, it is around the understanding of living on a planet where it doesn’t make sense that any of this is here, the biological reality that we exist, that anything exists, that life exists, that cells took in mitochondria and billions of years ago. None of this makes sense. So I do think there’s something interesting, or I don’t even know if it’s spirituality, and this answer is getting quite long,

AD: Don’t worry about it.

Tamara Lindeman: My belief system, if I have one right now, is that we live, we are nature, and we live within nature, and nature is us, but nature is also a lot older than us. And there are elements of wisdom in the way that the earth functions that we don’t necessarily have a good handle on slash try to ignore. And so to say God is a mirror, is to say everything responds. Other people respond to what you’re putting forth. The physical earth responds to what you’re putting out. What is around you will show you something of what you’re doing. If you’re willing to look. To open your eyes, you’re going to get a lot of information, which is what you’re supposed to do. What you’re supposed to do is look around and see what you are doing, see what you’re putting forth and adjust. 

Because if you’re a creature, if you’re living in the way that you’re supposed to in terms of what we are, you’re going to feel like good things are going to be coming back to you. And I don’t mean in a karma way, but I just mean the world will show you a lot of information based on what comes back to you. And it’s not like things that happen to you are your fault. It’s not like a karma thing. It’s just like information. So in that way, it’s a profound glimpse of the way the world is or the way that nature is, or the way that things that we don’t necessarily understand on a rational level are. That’s my perspective.

AD:  No, that’s awesome. This is what I live for. I live for answers like that because I mean, yeah, I think that what you’re saying totally resonates, and I think that it’s worth, I’ll take that in a few chunks. One, this feeling that so many of us have that nature is a thing outside of us is obviously a very destructive way of seeing things.

And I think it ties even into there are so many problems that come to a head when it comes to thinking about climate change. And I feel like this record, I feel like you articulate some uncomfortable but very profound truths in it as well. And I’ll try to get towards some of that. But I think one of the number one things that happens is, I mean, climate change is just such a huge thing, and it’s so existential that it’s almost like we don’t really even know how to conceive of it. We see it happening, and it’s just always happening somewhere else until it’s happening where you are. But there’s this other weird thing that I think has happened where our own humanhood as being part of nature, I almost feel like in some ways, our despair leads us into forgetting that in interesting or weird ways too, where you almost end up with this sort of rejection of humanity as worth being on the planet. You know what I mean? 

There’s a sort of nihilistic charge to one, understanding the ways in which we are impacting the planet and feeling a sense of shame about that or some sort of unexamined guilt, or maybe we don’t even know how to process that guilt. But it leads to a sort of profoundly anti-human stance, I think that is not really very good or helpful and not smart and wise, more so than all the dumb people who think humans should stay alive on the planet or whatever. But then there’s this other weird thing where it’s like we have to save the planet, and it’s like the planet is ultimately, the planet is going to be fine. We are not. And there’s a lot of other biodiversity that will not, and that is a profound loss. So I think one, a little bit of humility in the face of this problem is hard, but necessary. And then the other thing is remembering that we’re nature too. We’re not separate from it. We are it, it’s us. We’re all from this. And so I don’t know, I was drawn to that line and drawn to that notion of mirrors and that being a sort of recurring thing within your own work of you’re seeing the reflection of yourself, but in a weird way, this sort of mirror relationship that we experience with each other is a reminder that you see yourself, you define yourself through the relationships that you have with the culture around you and the people around you and inversely, they’re defining you, you’re defining them. It’s like this constant mirroring, right?

Tamara Lindeman: Yeah. And I mean, it’s like what you were saying too about climate, and I love that that’s where you already are, because I’ve been struggling to explain this where you go to a climate protest or you touch your toe into that realm, and you’re going to come up against someone expressing incredibly awful viewpoints. And it’s hard because I know that it comes from the same grief that I feel, or the same frustration, but I think that there’s so much conversation right now where we’re all trying to figure out how is it possible that people are going into the left and ending up on the right in terms of how can you go from clean living into authoritarianism? But I think it’s because there is an extremism that comes when you can’t see, when you’re not looking at things as humans, when you’re not looking at humans when you’re like, everyone needs to be perfect. And the goal of our movement is to expel all desire or imperfect language that if we do begin to think in a binary, even on the left, when we’re trying to break down a binary in one place, we’re building it in another. 

And what all of this has in common, I think, is the central wound of our modern post colonial life in a culture that is not very old. Most old cultures in human society find a way to hold the complexity of human nature and to say, man, we don’t make sense. We contain multitudes. Most old, old, if you were to read about the Dao or there are other ways. But I think in our sort of wounded modernity, we don’t have a place to talk about. It’s always there, humanity is always there, but we just don’t always know how to deal with it. And I think when it comes to climate from the beginning of getting involved this time around, I’ve just felt like I do it from a place of holding people’s failings. To me, the whole point of a climate policy would be to hold in our hearts the way that we don’t do what we want to do all the time. So how do we make caring? I mean, obviously most of the left holds that very closely. I don’t mean to–I’m talking about how is it possible that you can get to authoritarianism from either direction, and it’s like, well, there is an element of just different ways of seeing what we are, I guess. And that was why I wanted that word to go around the world with that word.

AD: Yeah, no, I think what you’re saying makes perfect sense. And I mean, a lot of it is about the limits of imagination and up when you hit a certain wall and you’re unable to imagine anything else but something like authoritarianism. And I really do think we’re in a very particularly fraught political moment in the United States, everywhere though there’s no place that’s exempt from it. We’re in this very fraught political moment. And I think right now we, I’m trying to think of the right way, the way I want to say this. I think that we have to become much more comfortable with the inner authoritarian in us. I don’t mean we have to become more comfortable so that we can embrace that and do that. Let’s do more authoritarianism. I think it’s more like that mirror that you hold up to another, when you hold up the mirror and you say you are doing this bad thing. And we talked a lot about social media the last time you were on the show.

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, interesting. Yeah.

AD: But that’s what you’re doing. You’re sort of saying, I’m fighting for the right cause, and I’m holding up this mirror and showing you, you are the villain in this story when we’re arguing or whatever. It’s like, okay, that’s part of it. But there still has to be this sort of holding that same mirror to yourself and questioning, well, what about all the ways that I fail at this exact thing that I’m lecturing somebody about? What about all the exceptions that I make in my own environmental policies, personal environmental policies? 

Where I go, I know that the plastic is bad, but I’m really thirsty right now, so I’m going to buy this Dasani or whatever. You know what I mean? It’s like, I’m not saying that there’s nothing that can be done, but I think we all have to become much more comfortable with the kind of internal criticism as well as a kind of societal one. But regardless of all of that, I feel like one of the most beautiful things you do on this record is just sort of puncture the myth that there is “fixing this “necessarily. You know what I mean?

Or that maybe fixing it is not the right way to think about it. Does that feel? Like irreversible damage hits on this notion of seeing things as they are a certain kind of, so often I feel like our pain doesn’t come from not knowing things. It comes from trying to convince ourselves that something other than what we know is happening is happening. Does that make sense?

Tamara Lindeman: Absolutely. It’s wild where all of this mental, when you’re doing mental gymnastics, it’s usually because you’re trying to lie to yourself. Not lie, but you’re trying to believe something you don’t believe or that is not true. And yeah, I mean that song, so that’s my friend Erin talking, and it’s just wild where this was just a conversation we had, and in six minutes or so, she just summed up the entirety of what I felt the record was saying or what I was struggling with myself of. What do you do about stepping sideways away from this? I want to find the silver lining before I’m done, before I’m done grieving. I want to find the silver lining or I want to find the, it’s okay,

But also stepping away from, oh my God, so much has been lost. So much has been destroyed. There’s no point. I’ll just lie down here. And this whole thing where the fact that she went from her own feelings directly to the grasslands and species extinction, I was like, you’re talking to the heart of our condition as people right now where we have to pick ourselves up and look at something that is destroyed. We can’t get past that. I think in Canada, we have really been, in the last five, 10 years, there has been a massive social reckoning of that this country was a colonial country and cultural genocide occurred, and this is the legacy we’re built. You can’t skip that part, but you also can’t dwell in that to the extent that you don’t see the beauty that you aren’t joyful. I think so much about older cultures, other cultures, there’s always humor. There’s always laughter. There’s always like, let’s feel this, and then let’s get drunk, or let’s make stupid jokes. It’s funny where you know, I don’t mean to really go on tangents. You’re indulging me, but it’s all connected to connect it back. But I think this song, yeah, I mean, it is so beautiful too. And when you land on that shore where you start to feel human again, to enjoy and laugh and feel good is the most important thing even amongst what’s happening. And it’s so hard to. I guess that’s the thing of moving away from the binary too.

AD: Well, I mean, in “Sewing,” you say something about “too late for perfection/to clean up the mess.” I think a lot about that thing you’re saying about what we can’t skip over the unexamined things are always the things that will trip us up. The thing that you don’t acknowledge is the thing that doesn’t really go away. It just waits until it’s going to make itself known, probably in some sort of embarrassing fashion for the person who was trying to hide it. And I think that that is crucial. But particularly in the west, in western countries where some of this stuff is abstractified, we don’t see it directly. I think that creates this weird thing. It’s funny because last, I don’t ever really, I don’t usually reference things that guests said that I disagreed with, but last year we had Moby on the podcast and we were talking about climate, and obviously Moby is somebody whose heart is in the right place with climate and he’s a very smart guy, and he’s done a ton of work to put his money where his mouth is. And I respect that. But I was saying to him that I think on some level, nobody is actually confused about what’s happening on the planet and that we all know it on some deep level. And he was like, I really don’t agree with you. I don’t think we all know it. I think there are many people who never think about it. 

And I see his point, and I think his point holds, but I think what I was trying to say was we don’t always consciously know the things we know, and we don’t always have the right language to put them into context, but I think certain feelings are sort of there. And the feeling I get a lot from things that I see happening are that the old narratives and frameworks just don’t serve us anymore and they’re not really speaking to what’s happening. And we’re clinging to those because we know them, and we really would prefer to know what’s happening.

But I just wonder if the reason for the old stories, or the reason why we keep defaulting back to fascist, authoritarian, strong man-ism is because that’s just a story that’s always going to feel like, okay, this makes sense. He’s going to kick all the bad guys out, and we’re going to fight all the right people and defeat them. I guess that makes sense on some level, but at the same time, it’s just, even that story is crumbling as we grapple for new narratives. Do you feel like, at the risk of sounding so over the top grandiose, but I mean, do you feel like art is the site where some of those new narratives might be born? Does it ever feel that way for you?

Tamara Lindeman: I mean, you can point to moments where that’s happened. I’ve been thinking a lot about the 1890s. That was the last time that inequality was this bad. I think we’ve now surpassed the age of the robber barons in terms of inequality and then the 1910s and twenties where this explosion of hyper modern art, I think of man, all of these ways of seeing the world were profoundly broken open in the first world war and the trauma of that. And then, the artists were very, I find it fascinating. 

Even whenever you have a chance to read something from that time in first person, it feels wildly modern. It feels like you’re reading something that someone wrote last week, and there are these moments in time where artists are living ahead and are breaking everything open. Absolutely. But at the same time, almost your question made me want to talk about just something that I found so exciting to care about climate, was encountering all these people who are putting forth alternate visions for the world that are not from an artistic perspective, but from a pragmatic perspective of, hey; the idea, for example, of getting rid of the idea of growth and economics. You don’t have to have an economic system that perpetually grows.  And in fact, that’s very non-biological because…

AD: We call that cancer. 

Tamara Lindeman: We call that cancer. Ideas like that, where it’s like, I do think there are other visions, and I think it’s not just art. It’s like so many, it’s just this, yeah, as you say, this old story reasserts itself. And I think what’s sad is that it’s almost like in the absence of these new stories, having a chance to be heard, because I think older people in an older mindset shut down the new story before they even understand what it really means, which is unfortunate of what’s happening right now. But I know what you mean. But I think art, in terms of being about empathy and seeing inside of someone else’s mind is such, it is a very telepathic sort of way of communicating. It’s faster than trying to articulate a 10 point plan.

AD: It allows things to be said. That couldn’t be said a lot of times right? At least, hopefully in a good situation, art isn’t bound by some of the same rules of even decorum or whatever. I think about, it’s funny because since he passed away, I’ve thought a lot about David Lynch. I thought about David Lynch a lot before he passed away, but there’s this great meme of him talking, and he’s talking about how art is just music specifically. He was talking about music. Music is just so incredible. He says it’s like a thing. And then I love that about David Lynch—”like a thing. It’s like a thing, then he goes into fire, air, nd it’s like he’s talking about art being an element, an element. And I think that it is that, and I think that human expression, it’s this funny thing that happens where so often when somebody is like, I’m going to write about let’s say climate or capitalism or any of these things, there’s always a sort of assumed activist bent to it.

Tamara Lindeman: Totally.

AD: But you can make art about the climate that isn’t about activism, that’s about, like you said, grieving, right? I mean, that’s a valid form of song. That’s a valid use of song. Not that there are invalid uses of songs, or maybe there are, but you know what I mean? I think.

Tamara Lindeman: Absolutely. No, that’s such a thoughtful, I feel like I need to write that and put it somewhere, because I do feel sometimes I encounter people who come to my art from that perspective of like, oh, you must be an actor. I definitely, I’ll go and make a social media post with a direct aim of, I hope this goes viral and people hear what I’m saying. Absolutely. That has an aim. But my songs come from such a tangled place of centering off in my own frailty and flaws, and that is what I’m putting forth on purpose. But also it would be dishonest of me to try and cram a 10 point plan into a song.

And I don’t feel, especially this record is really, that’s not what it’s for. It’s not about, because I think too, what’s so hard about activism, and a lot of people who are actually activists are not like this at all, but I think the armchair activism can become sort of like, this must be about goodness, or this will make me good. And it’s like, no, no, it’s just an activity, people are going to lose the meals on their table. It’s not about being good or bad, it’s just like there’s a problem.

AD: Yeah, absolutely. I feel like people, the moral angle of it or the sort of, I understand it. I mean, I fall prey to it. Of course, everybody does, right? It’s like, I will have this belief and this is the right one, and it’ll make me a good person. But it’s like what you were saying, it’s like the material conditions though. They don’t check in on you to see if you’re a good person or a bad person before your house washes away. You know what I mean? So, but that doesn’t mean that isn’t worth thinking about or talking about or considering the moral dimensions. But also, it’s funny you mentioned a sort of humor and that is still a part of, or should still be a part of how we live our lives because we need humor too. Some of the funniest jokes I’ve ever heard were at funerals, when everybody is so bummed. But it’s like, no, this is still a human thing that we’re going through. And I wonder sometimes if that desire to portray rightness gets in the way of expression of something real. You know what I mean?

Tamara Lindeman: Absolutely.

AD: Yeah. And just how freeing it is to have songs that are about things but don’t have to fit into these really tidy boxes that we like to put ideas in these days. You know what I mean? I feel like this record really has that.

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, thanks. Yeah. And it’s funny too, because I do think it’s so worth thinking about, goodness. But I do think there’s such a holdover of Christianity in our culture, which is this top down belief of God will tell me what is good, and even if what I see around me doesn’t tell me that what I’m doing is good, it must be good because God said so. Whereas this more elastic perspective of goodness, I mean, I think of my partner now, I feel like I’ve learned from him, there’s an element of just how you move through the day that’s not visible or quantifiable, but you’re bringing this openness to the world and people respond to you in this way, that you show them care and they show you care, and it spirals upwards. It’s so interesting where any sort of overthinking perfectionist perspective I have about rightness kind of goes out the window. 

There’s something different at work. And I think that it’s unfortunate because the internet puts us into certain modes of communication, and that’s a real thing that is affecting us right now. But when you are on the ground with people, the things that create a positive response are pretty unquantifiable and really have to do with how you feel, which is quite interesting. And I’ve been thinking about that a lot lately with, I guess that’s something, a thought I put in the “God is a mirror” category. I mean, yeah, I think that the climate crisis is this massive, it’s the overarching thing that really puts to shame a lot of our belief systems. It is very humbling where it’s like you can be, it doesn’t care what you think, as you said. And the folks who now are trying to impose a new fascism, which is very climate informed onto this crisis, are also going to fail because the crisis is so much bigger. But it’s also, it’s such an interesting thing to look at because it breaks everything apart, but it allows for, I think, a softer way of seeing the world or others, and maybe it does make me look to other cultures or to the past of how to swim with this level of loss.

AD: Yeah, absolutely. I feel like I think there’s certain people who, I always go back to center myself when I try to think about any of this stuff. And a big one for me is Naomi Klein, who is just, I thought that Doppelganger, her last book was just one of the most brilliant things I have ever read because it managed to do, I don’t know if you’ve read that one yet, but it’s essentially…

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, yeah, I have, yeah.

AD: She does so much in it, but there are parts where it’s an experimental memoir. You know what I mean? Yeah. About her own life and about Naomi Wolf’s life and these sort of forks in the road and these sort of ways that this weird thing where we create this doppelganger effect when we refuse to always create these shadow versions of things. And we exist within these things, and we don’t cross into the shadow, but it’s like I was saying, everything that we choose not to address, it finds its way out there. And it’s expressed in some other weird way. And I think anybody who’s listening to this podcast, that is, I would guess most people listening are probably left-leaning, liberal to leftist types, not exclusively, I’m sure. But I would say that stuff that Naomi Klein was talking about in that book where it’s like, “Hey, if you cede the ground and Steve Bannon is the only person talking about essentially corporatized medicine, right?” Or you cede the ground and he’s the only guy talking about censorship online or whatever. 

It’s like, we don’t want to touch this stuff. It seems so radioactive, and we don’t want to contaminate our pure sense of idealism or whatever. But it’s like you give it up and then those are going to be the only people talking about it. And you can’t be all that surprised when people start drifting over to that because they’re hearing their concerns echoed. And so I always worry, we’ve talked about when the fascists all start just saying, yeah, climate change is totally real, and that’s why we got to use a drone wall to make sure that we obliterate any child who comes near our border. I mean, the shift from denial to that is going to happen in a blink. You know what I mean? And so I really, really feel like coming up with ways about talking about this stuff and coming up with ways of legitimately addressing questions like degrowth or putting a cap on how much it’s like, it’s going to require a lot of creativity. It’s going to require a lot of imagination. And at the risk of sounding super cheesy, it’s going to require us to really be human, like hold space for contradictions because the machines don’t like contradictions, and the binary doesn’t like contradiction, but the human is contradiction. Humanhood is contradictory things existing within us.

Tamara Lindeman: Absolutely.

AD: And the machines can fake a lot, but they can’t fake that, really. Right?

Tamara Lindeman: No. And they don’t understand us. They don’t understand our humor. Most people know. They’re like, I know you’re joking. I know you’re not joking. We know. It is interesting how much opposition can exist within a normal conversation or a normal social ritual or whatever. I agree with you about that book, and it’s just so important to read right now because she’s just talking about what we’re seeing. And yeah, I mean, it’s scary because a lot of climate people have been warning of that as well for a long time, that this could create a rise in a beautiful idea of community and taking care, or it could create a rise in this other perspective, which is also climate informed and in a dark way, and it’s kind of a choice. But the one thing I do feel is the problem with the thing about fascism, on whatever level and a personal societal is, it’s so brittle. They need to convince you over and over again because it’s so brittle, it shatters apart at the smallest touch. And that’s something I really think about. And it’s funny where it’s like we’ve been talking a lot about opposition and good and bad is not real, but I genuinely believe that what’s so interesting, or what I’ve been finding in my personal life is the things that are good are very flexible and also very resilient. It’s like I really think of a vine or something. Things that are good can weather a shock. The more that something is like it takes care to take care of things that are good, but they’re like…

AD: They’re strong. 

Tamara Lindeman: They can bend and come back. And I think there is something about a fascist viewpoint that’s just so, it’s so narrow, and it always breaks apart. It never lasts very long, and it takes so much work to keep it in place, whereas like “Hey, it was nice to see you friend” You don’t have to work to keep that alive.

AD: No, no, absolutely. Yeah. I think that having songs and ideas that help us examine humanity and humanhood, it’s a very helpful thing right now because we need to stay in touch with that part of ourselves. We need to stay in touch with the part of ourselves that is human, and that complicates and makes us inefficient modes of production and all of that stuff. We need to lean into that stuff. We need to lean into the desire. I’m also a big fan of Douglas Rushkoff who does that Team Human podcast. He should have you on his show.

Tamara Lindeman: Oh, I don’t know him.

AD: He’s a media theorist, and I think he has written all sorts of stuff. But he talked about it. I heard him on a podcast talking about how these machines can mimic our poetry and can mimic the cadence of our jokes and can mimic all of these things that we typically assigned human humanity needed, needed to do that. He was saying, as these machines can ever more convincingly do that, the things that they still can’t do are the things that we will start to potentially view as inherently human touch, much heart to heart connection, like staring into somebody’s eyes, longingly, these things that they won’t be able to do. But for that matter, I think in music, wrong notes, rhythms that don’t make sense, a bad harmony, that is actually a great harmony. You know what I mean? So I feel like there’s still so much room for humanness, and that maybe if it gets bland enough out there in machine land, people are going to start going, I want contradiction. I want roughness. I want something that doesn’t map cleanly onto the grid, and that’s human.

Tamara Lindeman: Yeah. 

AD: I think at least.

Tamara Lindeman: No, definitely. Definitely.

AD: Well, it’s been such a pleasure talking with you about all this stuff, Tamara. It’s always a huge treat.

Tamara Lindeman: It was lovely to go deep.

AD: Yeah. I can’t help but do it. And we went really deep on the last one, and all these years later, I’m so glad that you are still putting out great music like you’re doing and pushing yourself and going even farther than you ever had. It’s a real treat to have you on Transmissions, and thank you so much for your time and this great record.

Tamara Lindeman: Great. Thank you so much.

 

 
 Posted on March 26, 2025Podcast The Weather Station
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });