# Transmissions :: Jazz Is Dead (Ali Shaheed Muhammad & Adrian Younge)

**Transmissions — Jazz Is Dead (Ali Shaheed Muhammad & Adrian Younge)** · _2025-02-26_ · by Jason Woodbury · `podcast`
**Tags:** Adrian Younge, Ali Shaheed Muhammada, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2025/02/26/transmissions-jazz-is-dead-ali-shaheed-muhammad-adrian-younge/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://ebotaylor.bandcamp.com/album/ebo-taylor-jid022

## Body

This week on Transmissions: Adrian Younge and Ali Shaheed Muhammad, the duo behind the label and concert series Jazz Is Dead. Founded in 2017, Jazz Is Dead began releasing new work by jazz artists frequently sampled in rap and hip-hop in 2020, including releases from legendary players like Roy Ayers, Azymuth, Gary Bartz, Lonnie Liston Smith, Tony Allen, and more. On January 31st, the duo released JID022, featuring new music from 88-year-old Ghanian highlife and afrobeat master Ebo Taylor, and on April 4th, they will release JID023, featuring Brazilian vocalist Hyldon. Recorded in analog at Linear Labs, the Jazz is Dead series does more than pair younger players with established elders; it showcases the powerful link that connects musicians across decades. 

As producers, musicians, podcasters, and much more, both Ali and Adrian are heavy hitters. Muhammad is of course known for his work with A Tribe Called Quest, Lucy Pearl, and The Midnight Hour, a duo with Younge. And of course Adrian is an accomplished musical force too, check out his work with The Delfonics, Souls of Mischief, Ghostface Killah, and Kendrick Lamar. 

We taped this conversation in January, in the hazy, strange weeks after the terrible fires that tore through the city of Los Angeles. That’s where our conversation starts—reflecting on history lost, and what it takes to preserve it, and also, why they don’t necessarily think of Jazz Is Dead as an archival or preservationist project in the first place.

Transmissions :: Jazz Is Dead (Ali Shaheed Muhammad & Adrian Younge)

Next week on Transmissions: producer Steve Lillywhite on his work with U2, DMB, Phish and more. 



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


Transmissions is produced and hosted by Jason Woodbury, in collaboration with the Talkhouse Podcast Network. Episodes are edited and engineered by Andrew Horton, and imagery is created by Ian Everett. Executive producer: Justin Gage, AD’s founder. This episode was transcribed by Keegan Nelson. Transmissions‘ theme song is ”Buster Buster,” by David Michael Moore, courtesy of Ulyssa—you can pre-order his LP, Umburkus Returns now. Our closing theme is “We March Under The Gladiolus Flag,” by Young Hierophant. Additional bed music heard throughout this episode includes Prairewolf, Maston, House Band, and JPW. Check out a playlist of music featured on Transmissions and selections from this season’s guests.

Aquarium Drunkard: Well thank you guys for taking the time. Adrian. Are you in LA? Are you both in LA? 

Adrian Younge: Yeah, we’re both in LA and we’re both safe too.

AD: Okay, good, good. That’s excellent to hear. I mean, it’s hard to even wrap your head around it honestly. You guys have a front row seat, as does Justin from Aquarium Drunkard. You know he lives there, and my conversations with him…I mean I really kind of have no words at this point to kind of address everything that’s going on, but I’m very glad to hear that you guys are safe.

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: Thank you.

Adrian Younge:  Thank you very much.

AD: I’m a big fan of the record store out there, Artform, and thinking about Jazz is Dead, thinking about what you guys are doing with this project, to comprehend how important the West Coast and Los Angeles is, specifically to the sort of history of jazz, is something that I’ve been considering a lot as I think about whatever these next few years look like as people try to rebuild, it’s just sort of a recognition of what’s there.

Bennie Maurine suffered this horrific loss and how many other people and how many landmarks have been erased? But anyway, not to try to, “I’ll put a positive spin on it” or something like that, but at the same time, thinking about what you guys do and the archival and preservationist tendencies of this project has really just got me thinking about how important it is for stuff like this, right now. And so we’ll start the interview on that note.

Adrian Younge: Cool. It’s interesting because, I don’t know about you Ali, but I’m pretty sure you’re on the same page. When we got the news that, we should probably get out of here, the only thing I took was my watch and it’s weird because I was more concerned about some of my camera equipment than even my studio stuff. I was actually having this conversation with a friend, another vintage collector studio collector, a week before the fires all happened. We were talking about the fact that as an artist, your job is to become who you’re supposed to be, right? But some people look at the equipment as the way to actually be there, but you have to have your own journey and the equipment, they are just tools for you. So because my equipment is insured, if I lose everything, I’m definitely not getting it all back. Definitely not. But will I get enough tools to be able to create something special? The answer is yes. And it’s like I’m fortunate because of that because most musicians don’t have insurance on their stuff and if they can’t get it back now, it’s going to take a long time to get it back.

But conversely, all musicians were broke musicians. So no matter how much money I have in the bank, I’m always a broke musician. I don’t care. So I know what it takes to not have enough and struggle and wait till you could get this piece or get that piece. So I say this all to say that when it comes to these times of tragedy, and as much as we love our equipment and how our equipment gives us our sound and we love our records and all that stuff, at the end of the day, I’m more concerned about our families and friends being safe, man. And that’s just the feeling that really took over me that minute when I decided to get my vintage gold watch. I was like, that’s easy. Lemme just grab that. I’m out. And that’s it. 

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: I mean for everyone that’s experiencing it, specifically people who are in Los Angeles who have suffered the losses are feeling it more than anyone else. And for me, the energy in terms of losses is reminiscent of 9/11 to me a little bit…just next level. And it makes me think of those people whose homes are being bombed in other countries and having to flee in the middle of the night. And so, it’s funny, Adrian, that you said you thought about your cameras because all of my equipment is insured and the only thing I thought about was documents, like my birth certificate, and then I was like, “The Hasselblad, I’ll grab that.” 

Adrian Younge and Ali Shaheed Muhammad: [Laughing] 

Ali Shaheed Muhammad:  All things that you and I both have: we have custom equipment, custom made keyboards, hard to find-type things, but it was just like, “My camera, I’m good.” Really. There was nothing else. Nothing else. I was like oh and my computer, my hard drives, which was already packed-

Adrian Younge: And you got that backed up too.

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: It’s already backed up. So I was just the hard drives and I feel the same way that Adrian had just expressed is that when it comes to Jazz Is Dead, as you say, we are preserving, I think it’s a little bit, it’s partially preserving it, but it is our reverence for those luminaries who came before us and who have given us so much of their art and their perspective of their life journey. So in this moment, until we’re all in the ground, I think as artists and creators, we are always going to have that something that drives us to being creative. As long as we have our minds and our arms and fingers and faculties to be able to be like, “Excuse me, can I borrow your guitar, sir? I want to put something down. Do you have a microphone? Can I sit with you in your space?” 

I think as long as we are inspired and we’re not affected in that way, we haven’t suffered an injury of the brain, then I think we will—not just Adrian and I—but all the other artists like Bennie and so many others, Madlib, we’ll be able to get through this great adversity. And I hadn’t thought about our relationship and what we do with Jazz is Dead in terms of how will we take this moment in and how will it shape what we’ve already done for the next year or whatever. I haven’t thought about it. I don’t know if Adrian has or if Drew has, outside of just trying to lend our support with our resources. But in terms of the art, not planning like that, because time will tell what will happen.

AD: You brought up Madlib and I feel like every couple months I see it go semi-viral on Instagram or whatever social media site, people will start circulating, “Hey, did you know that Madlib made this classic album on an iPad?” And it’ll always freak people out because so often, especially when you’re meditating your experience of musical gear through the internet or through looking at old classic recording studio advertisements or you read Tape Op or anything like that, it’s easy enough to start thinking this is the music, these tools, but it’s not. And I think that what you’re talking about, I’m glad you brought up that Jazz Is Dead is not entirely like a preservationist project because I don’t necessarily think it is. I think in some ways that’s why I love the name so much is because, I don’t know who I first heard say it, but I remember back when I was younger, I would read music magazines and there would always be this “rock is dead” kind of thing. They would always say “rock is dead” or “rock is back.”  More often it was somehow “rock is back,” but that implied that it was dead. And I just sort of remember, at some point, realizing maybe rock being dead is cool because then who cares what we do with it? We take it in new directions or it gets mutated into something that it never could have been in its old form. When I listen to the Jazz is Dead stuff, I think the name is brilliant on multiple fronts, because it’s a provocation and I love a provocation in this time. We need more thoughtful provocations and disrupting’s of people’s idle status, and I feel like Jazz is Dead has that going for it.

Adrian Younge: Thank you. 

AD: It’s a brilliant name. I think of “war is over if you want it,” John and Yoko’s protest in black and white text. I remember the first time I heard “Whitey on the Moon” by Gil Scott-Heron. I mean it stopped me in my tracks. Growing up a kid of the middle class-ish space race fantasy. I had never heard it put that way, but I could just sort of see those words in my head and I wanted to know more about what was going on. I feel like Jazz is Dead, has that going on. But it also feels like it’s not that conservative traditionalist presentation. You guys, it sounds like it’s really crucial that you’d make it your vision of what this stuff is, which is actually maybe, do you find that’s the best way to pay tribute to these guys is by treating them as present-day creative forces of energy? You know what I mean?

Adrian Younge: Yeah, I think before directly answering that question…it’s something that I think we think about a lot. Why do we do what we do? And there’s something inside of us, there’s a machine inside of us that’s being controlled without our knowledge and kind of tells our soul what’s supposed to be happening and we just follow what’s asked of us. So I think that Ali and I, as musicians and purveyors of the best records from around the world, DJ-ing and all that stuff, there’s so much music that’s inspired us and there’s so much music we’ve always wanted to do. And it’s because hip-hop is the bricolage of vinyl culture. It’s sampled everything from country to jazz. And so we’re kind of driven by doing all those things that we’ve always wanted to do from, let’s just say Ali and Tribe, they’re sampling these dope jazz records. But when he sampled that, did he know that he was going to do a Gary Bartz album? You know what I’m saying? There’re levels, you would always want to do stuff, but then your desires have to meet your capabilities. So as time goes on, there’s something inside of us telling us to do this or do that, make this kind of music or make that kind of music. And when applying this theory to Jazz is Dead, our partner, Andrew Lojero, who runs the concerts, he would just have dope people coming out that we never ever thought we’d get to see live, like Arthur Verocai, or Cortex, or whomever it may be.

And then at the same time we’ll get a Brian Jackson or Marcos Valle. And Ali and I are recording new albums with these people, but it’s all part of the same spirit, the same drive inside of us that’s telling us to do things because we just have to for some reason it’s like instinctual and it’s really not about money because it ain’t no money thing. There’s no money to be made here. It is literally about us fulfilling a spiritual drive that is really hard to define. But that’s why we say yes to things that get in the way of other things that we have to do. But these things, it’s like we have to do this because it’s actually us. So when we say “giving back to these people” and all that stuff, that’s kind of a byproduct I think, because we don’t do a Roy Ayers album because we want to quote, ‘Hey man, hey Ali, bro, we got give back bro. Let’s get Roy Ayers.” It’s a byproduct of us accomplishing our dreams to work with these masters. And we soak in a lot from them because we learned how they created whatever they created or whatever, and we continue their conversations and new music and new concerts and just new content for people to learn more about these people. And it’s hard to explain why. The only thing that I could say is that we are all passionate about our culture just as you are with this incredible podcast. You know what I’m saying? So it’s strange, but that’s kind of my answer, my nebulous answer to what you asked.

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: What I wanted to add to what Adrian is saying is that when you have accomplished your dreams…I forgot how you just phrased it, Adrian when you say “your desires match your capabilities?” The equal to that is a dream realized and accomplished. And so we’ve done that and we don’t stop dreaming. We don’t stop having creative ideas based on the journey. And the hip-hop has been part of that journey for us and has taught us things and it has made us aware of things and it has allowed us to be masters of things through the culture, in all aspects of it. And so, you get to a point in life where when the fantasy or the dream can be a reality, cause you’re living it, you’re an embodiment of that, then it just becomes like, what’s next? What can we really do to be in service of other people or just continuing to further the impossible in our human form? And so when it comes to the lineage in music being folklore, from an anthropology aspect of connecting with what came before you, and then seeing into the future of what’s possible, well, we here right now and these other jazz luminaries, they here right now and they got 60 years, 70 years on top of Adrian and I, but they still as fresh as if Earth was day one. And we recognize that. And so we want to tap further into the exploration of what’s possible.

And so they have been willing to take the journey with us. Everybody’s just coming in fresh and young because it hasn’t been done before, if that makes sense. So the idea, the concept is new and because we bring our full selves to it, it becomes something that when people hear it, they receive it, they understand this is a continuation of something that’s familiar, but it’s also something else and something different. And like Adrian said, it’s not like we plan to say, “Hey, we want to give back,” but it becomes an energy source that’s a byproduct of us dreaming. And they dreamed. They dreamed before we did, and they gave us all these beautiful records that’s been sitting with us for 40, 50 years or with our grandparents and our grandparents pass it to the parents and so on. We’re just doing that.

AD: Yeah. It’s funny, you talked about this idea that you’re sampling these records when you’re younger and on one level you could ask, “Hey do you ever think you’re going to make a record with Gary Bartz,” ask that kid that and he would would probably say, “Yeah, right, or whatever.” But on some level, deep inside in the realm of artistic imagination, there’s something there that you were like, “Well, yeah, I mean probably somehow if that presented itself in some way or actually became attainable to do that, of course I would do that.” I hope, at least that we’re sort of entering this moment where people are being a little bit more intentional about what they hope to get out of their engagement with music. And I think as we’re in this moment where new technology sort of threaten to take the human out of music making, I hope, and I feel like I’m starting to see a little bit of a groundswell towards this idea that people are going to want extremely human music. And I feel like when I listen to these records, I’m hearing extremely human sounds.

Adrian Younge: Can I interject a minute? Would an Ali wanna work with a Gary Bartz, whose records he sampled? This is the way that I look at that. There’s a time when Ali could work with this person, but working with this person is pressing buttons on a drum machine and scratching over it, right? Which is cool and new and innovative at a time. But in order to have to write music and play instrumentation live to tape and all that, there’s a journey that has to happen first in order to get there. And then you can make the choice if you’re just playing a drum machine and scratching over it. But then you can also make the choice if you can play drums or play bass, it’s a whole different thing. 

So that thought process at a time when hip-hop was still kind of in its infancy in a way, the producer, most producers, didn’t even really look at live instrumentation in this way. Most producers of that time would’ve looked at Ali like he was a strange dude for wanting to learn how to play bass or whatever. So it’s interesting because Jazz is Dead ultimately really reflects a self-journey. We all have this passion that we can’t really define, but while we have this passion, all of our other passions are preparing us for this moment. So us being able to have a jazz label, recording the same way that these icons recorded in their heyday in the ’60s and the ’70s, but using the ear that hip-hop gave us to produce these albums for today is a whole different kind of perspective that would’ve been very hard to grasp, let’s just say in ’91 or ’92.

Because we were all still finding these great records. You know what I’m saying? And obviously everybody heard all these dope records, but what these records became throughout the years, it’s funny, some of these records that are great, amazing, records—in ’91’, ’92 had only really came out 14 years before that, 15 years before that. 

AD: It’s kind of crazy to think about. 

Adrian Younge: And we were still in an analog world at that time, predominantly. So now when we’re 50 years removed from this stuff, 40, 50 years removed from this stuff, you get to really understand what these cats was doing back then. And when we’re creating with them, the one thing that we always say is how did they have the foresight to know that this pocket would’ve worked? 

Because most of ’em were doing things that didn’t really get recognized in the popular scheme of things per se. Now there is this jazz-funk fusion that obviously was kind of like them going pop for the time, bringing jazz to people in order to dance, which is kind of like, “Oh my God’, how could you do that?” in the seventies? But still, they were doing very avant-garde things that were not getting them the same kind of sales as disco records would be.

So, I say all of this to really say, this journey is a strange one. And even though we are trying to “preserve,” the question is, “Well, what are we preserving?” Because as you create, you are creating history. So, in a weird way, we’re preserving our ideas being mixed with their ideas and what we’re learning from them, the same way they did when they were working with their elder statesmen. We don’t even know what all this means, what all this is going to be, we don’t know what these concerts are going to be. We don’t know what these label’s going to be, years down the line. But what we do know right now is that we have a duty that’s driven by some kind of passion that’s hard to define, but I think we’ll have a better understanding what all this is decades later.

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: I just wanted to speak to what Adrian was saying. I think the question of what are we preserving is really a good question. And I like to think that, well, hopefully we’re preserving the idea that things are possible. I think right now, no differently than some of the other jazz musicians who were putting their heart, blood, sweat, tears, everything into the music, into their albums and not really making a lot of money, but they were so devoted to their journey that they continued to do that. And doing so created barriers and boundaries, not intentionally, just by other people’s lack of understanding. And with those barriers then become a resistance to the beautiful things that’s happening. And so it’s not mainstream, so it’s not being given this formula to be implanted in our brains and to be repeated and repeated, because we’re force fed it. We think that’s “that’s the best music.” Sometimes there’s things you discover 35 years later, you go, “Oh my God, oh what the hell is this? And is this the first time I’m discovering it? And when I’m speaking to people, no one knows what this is, but there’s so much greatness involved.” 

So I like to think that with what we’re doing, and this kind of even speaks to your point about AI, I think that we—and this wasn’t the part of the plan—but it is funny how things just start to, sometimes your mission is already in you, but it becomes more realized once you start living it. And I think for us, we’re breaking those barriers because there’s something in the human that just has this, “nope, nope, nope,” a blockage. And when it comes to art and creativity, there are no rules for it. But what we’ve experienced, and I think growing up in the hip-hop culture, here was a system that didn’t want to allow this voice to come through. And the OGs were like, “Later for that. We’re setting up our sound systems, we’re setting up our microphones, we’re going to do our dance, we’re going to spray our art. Whether you understand it or not, we don’t care. It is something in us that knows that we are human and we have value and we’re going to be ourselves and speak it and show it.” And so they dealt with barriers in blocks. But look what happened. This art form of hip-hop is still reigning so much that you have people in Asia who are borrowing so hard from it that their pop stars are ultimately just straight hip-hop stars. You know, it has a different exterior. And so hopefully as time goes on, we will inspire the barriers or the gatekeepers to just knock it off. Because even within the genre of jazz, there are some elders who have not been, they haven’t been invited, we haven’t been invited to the spaces. You know what I’m saying? And that’s unfortunate that humans do that to other humans.

AD: The barriers, dividing lines, boundaries, those get drawn for various reasons. Sometimes maybe because they’re necessary for the commercial side of it to some degree. I came up in record stores and it’s like, you’ve got to file this record in a section. Sometimes you’d put a few in multiple sections or whatever, but regardless, you had to consider those things. And when I think about jazz, I mean it’s even culturally, it can be sort of a touchstone for sort of stodgy and stuffy and sort of conservative things. And it’s like, “Well, no, I’m into jazz” or whatever. But for me coming up in, like I said, record store culture, eventually getting access to magazines like Grand Royal, the Beastie Boys’ incredible and so eclectic magazine, I started to see…I just turned 40 last year and it’s like my engagement with jazz and my engagement with hip-hop, you can’t untangle them. 

You know what I mean? And I’m somebody who, there’s a lot of people who are just like me. We came to this art through this other art. And when I listen to, I’m a big fan of stuff like The Avalanches, where it’s just this kaleidoscopic collage of genres existing in its own thing. They’re not making jazz music. But when I hear really creative sample-driven work alongside really creative improvised or spontaneously composed or jazz-oriented, however you want to, I hear a kinship there because there’s just sort of sense of “We’re making this ours.” You know what I mean? So when you talk about what are you guys preserving, I mean in terms of, I hear almost like the jazz spirit, which is really not actually a different spirit than the spirit that drives a really creative avant-garde composer or producer or a rapper or anybody.

It’s sort of the same spirit. But jazz is really kind of this special zone where things that don’t always get prized in music get prized there, which is a focus, attention, sometimes absolutely radical possibility. When I started hearing free jazz records, I was like, “Yeah, you guys can keep your Touch & Go punk or whatever. This is way more intense, way more freaky, way more insane.” And so I feel like just that spirit, and I also feel like in 2025, as we’re sitting here, jazz and hip-hop continue to go back and forth in really, really fascinating ways. It feels like jazz is crossing over in a lot of different areas right now. I think of the International Anthem label and guys like Jeff Parker, somebody where you’re just like, “I can’t even wrap my head around all the places this guy’s coming from.”

But then, yeah, you’ll hear something on a Kendrick record and be like, “Oh!” You guys both contributed, I think, to a Kendrick record. So I feel like we’re in a really interesting place, but I think about the culture of hip hop and the culture of that artistic spirit. I think it’s really fascinating to see how you guys have spun that off into this different direction. And I feel like the name Jazz is Dead. It certainly has to piss off some of the gatekeepers that we’ve been talking about. Have you guys had some strong objections to it from anybody?

Adrian Younge: Yeah. It’s interesting because when you hear the name, you either really like it or really hate it. There’s not necessarily an in-between. And it’s interesting because as you study culture, as you study the etiology of culture really, especially when it comes to music, and all types of arts, you start to realize that you, regardless of what age you are, you’re just part of a cycle. And those people that came before you were part of another cycle. Our thoughts aren’t new thoughts. These things are the same things we’ve been saying. You go back and hear Miles Davis saying the same thing, you go back and hear it in documentaries on jazz, “We don’t like this term jazz, blah, blah, whatever.” Because “Jazz is Dead” has many different meanings. But the whole point of the matter is this, as you prove your worth regarding who you are as an artist and somebody that can properly articulate how you feel about certain music based on your contributions, it’s interesting when you’re speaking with older people, and they may hate it—until they see what you’re doing, and then it’s like, “Oh my God, this is the most amazing thing.” Because we’re giving them life to a very younger audience, something that they didn’t necessarily have before that. And when they really understand the grandeur of what we’re doing, the ultimate purpose, everyone always pretty much gets won over. But to be honest with you, it is way more people that dig it than don’t like it. And when people don’t like it, I’ve never, me personally, I’ve never felt threatened, but I don’t know. Ali, how about you?

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: [Laughs] Oh, wow. No, I’ve never felt threatened. If anything, I feel sometimes the disappointment of people…How do I say this? Not really just taking a moment to just see what it really is. And there are faction of resistance, people who are resistant and you can’t win everybody. So I know that in my mind, and I’m not on this mission to be, to prove like “You’re going to love Jazz is Dead.” No. However, when it comes to certain institutions where if we had more kinship with certain people in those institutions who just won’t give us the time of day, just because. You can look at any revolutionary person, idea, any thought and go where the person might not have really seemed like they achieved that moment and they could have gone 50 years and then someone will say, “Well, if they would’ve just did this little small thing.” So if we would’ve just now say “Jazz is…” it’s like, “Oh, that was the difference that would allow for us to be accepted?” And it’s like probably not. If you really look at it, if it said “Jazz is…” nobody would even pay us any attention. So dropping that “dead” on there makes it go like, what the eff? And at the end of the day, knowing that you can’t win people over, then you don’t get obsessed on that. It’s just like we do what we feel is in our hearts and that speaks for itself. Whether people understand, they join the mission, we love it. If they don’t, we still love ourselves. And we know that we have so much respect for the culture and the things, the ideas that we’ve put forth demonstrates it. So I don’t feel threatened. I haven’t, no one’s ever come up to me with the mighty charge…be it in the pen, with the pen because there sometimes have been certain, a couple of reviews that could feel like a threat that wasn’t really agreeable. But it’s “later” for that person. 

And in terms of bodily confrontation, that hasn’t happened, and I hope it never happens for any of us, but we are thankful to, again, going back to what I said, that Adrian and I have great accomplishments outside of Jazz is Dead. And as artists, we have been unconventional in our art expression and we’ve met people all over the world who have nothing but love for that. And so to then have this sort of Transformers-style everybody coming together to make this beautiful concept come alive, it is a blessing. We have so much respect for the entire team in Jazz is Dead. Everyone puts their whole being into it. So we’re very grateful for everyone on the team. And then for the people, for the artists, the older artists who are willing to mess with younger people, I think it’s important. Likewise for us, we like having younger people in the room on different levels. It doesn’t just even have to be musicians, but because there’s that connection of continuance, of learning. And so we all are open and receiving that kind of energy because it then helps us to go, “Oh, I know where we can move.” And then for the fans and journalists and people like yourselves who understand and sharing this with friends, it’s a beautiful accomplishment and it allows us to continue to dream and see what we can come up with next.

AD: It strikes me as very much a more focused on the idea of musical community than the sort of traditional commercial enterprises or whatever. It’s a record label. But I thought about that too in regards to the fact that you guys are DJs, you guys have done radio, you guys have done podcasts, you understand communication. But also you’ve approached the music from very different places at different times. You’ve seen it from a lot of different angles. A lot of times getting that close can sort of ruin your ability to feel that tapped into the music, if you’re not careful; if you don’t keep that as the focus; if you don’t sort of intentionally place that in there. You guys talked about sort of having to do this, and I often feel like people say that and people are like, “Yeah, yeah, I know what you mean.” 

I know what you mean. But if you really drill down on that, it becomes more and more radical the more you think about it, right? “Well wait, why do I have to do this? What is compelling me? What exactly is that driving force?” And I feel like for some people, music just says something to them so fundamental that you’re willing to go that direction no matter how sort of uncertain it is. And it probably is as uncertain as it has ever been for more musicians. Do you know what I mean? But focusing on that idea of “What is this, what is this force that compels me?” I mean, can you maybe reflect a little on the, potentially spiritual, component of what you mean?

Adrian Younge:  Go for it, Ali.

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: Yes. So the best way I can try, I don’t know if I will be able to fully articulate it, but there was a song that I heard. I mean I’ve heard many songs in my youth, but one that stood out to me called “Journey To The Light” by a band called Brainstorm. And it was, then, and still to this day, I think it was recorded in 1977 and released in ’78. And it is still to this day, one of the songs that when I hear it, my body physically reacts, I get goosebumps on me. And it’s because the message in the music was called “Journey To The Light.” And they were speaking about an energy source that was seemingly so far away, but so close to us. And if you would allow yourself to receive it, the places that you can go will be beyond your imagination. And so whatever that was, that energy, that it laid into me and it’s been there and “It’s like, why are we driven to reproduce?” We don’t know our DNA coding just says it, right? Why are we driven to eat? Something in our DNA says we have to eat, otherwise we’re just going to fade away. So when it comes to the music and it’s just like the “why,” is it self-serving? Maybe? But there is definitely a spiritual connection. I will say spiritual. I think when it comes to music personally, I feel responsible and careful because it’s an energy source that could be used for less than good, and it can be possessive where you are losing yourself and doing things that really is not helping. So for me, the spiritual part, I try to, first and foremost, ask myself why. And I feel if I don’t have a purpose when it comes to recording, then I shouldn’t record. I think that there has to be a purpose in your art.

Whatever, I’m not going to define it, but if you don’t know what the purpose is and you’re just doing it because everyone else around you is doing it, then there’s no gains. There’s zero. So for me, I try to make sure that I’m not recording without purpose. And so I think knowing that I’m driven, knowing that there’s something inside with regards to the energy, what I feel, something that helps me, something I think can help others, passing information along, making someone feel good. What people are living through in Gaza and in Los Angeles and Ukraine and Sudan and Haiti and Brazil and the streets of East New York and Brownsville—people are feeling hopelessness. And so if the music could just take you out of that for a moment, then my purpose is fulfilled. Listening to KRS and Chuck D and some of their poetry things that they were having lack of access, but the way that they put it into a song that made me and my peers go, “Yo, somebody’s going to have to deal with us, fight the power” and so the music became educational. So I hope to do the same thing to inspire whatever it is that you’re going to do. And I can’t turn that off.

I still feel that little sense in my head sometimes at the age of 54 when a police car pulls up behind me, I shouldn’t even feel that at all. I know people of other ethnicities, they don’t ever have that sense. And so there’s so many different things that I could go into categories that I could show is the purpose, but until I feel like there’s some comfort here…and to go back to your other point where we’re going into this AI-driven [future], we don’t know where it’s going to go. It’s so brand new. I talked to several musicians, and some have a great concern; I’m not scared of it, it’s just another tool. But the notion that we forget our greatness and we forget the reward of hard work, the exercising of the muscle is hard. It hurts, it’s painful. But what do we get from that. Longevity. If you get to live 80 years old, you can still walk and not have to rely on someone pushing you, things like that. And so knowing that we have this new technology, but is it a new threat or is it something that’s going to deliver us into the next phase of whatever historically has been that thing that you look back 2000 years ago—that bump in the history map was the thing that changed everything—I don’t know, and I’m sorry to be so winded with this.

AD: No, it’s beautiful, man. I’m digging it.

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: But just those are the things that I think about and here we are.

AD: I’ll just say, I was watching the video where you guys have got Dom Salvador in the studio. I found myself wondering what is it even like to be in the same room as somebody making that sound? Because that is, to me, you could have all the AIs in the whole universe and they would never be able to do that. Now you give Dom Salvador AI to play with and maybe he takes it in some direction that the AI would never be able to do that either. You know what I mean? That’s what I mean. I think I agree with you that it is just a tool, but I do think that it’s a tool and so the question needs to be more seriously thought of as like, okay, so what are we going to use it to do? And if what you’re going to use it to do is come up with a kind of generic pop song, then I don’t know. That seems like kind a waste of that technology. It seems like kind of a waste of. Or if that’s what you want you get to, and that’s as far as you want to take it. Okay. So maybe the tool makes it possible for everybody to do that, but it’s that thing that we started talking about: even if all the equipment in the studio is gone, music is not the equipment, music is not the tool. Music isn’t even the record, or the CD, or the cassette, or any of that. 

It’s something else. I think it’s a realm of imagination and it’s a place that we get to, especially when people are playing together in a space, something starts to happen that just feels very much beyond one single individual. And so to me, that’s something where it’s like AI’s not going to take that away from us as long as we choose to hang onto it. And if we don’t choose to hang onto it, then we might be in real trouble. And there are a lot of valid reasons why we should really all reflect on how we do exactly that, hang onto that aspect. You know I got to see Pharaoh Sanders a few times, and he’s somebody whose records I just listened to obsessively because when I first discovered those, it was like, I had already heard A Love Supreme. So I was like, I knew what I was listening to was a little better than I would have, but it was really, “The Creator Has a Master Plan” where I was like, this is music that is made for existence. Any moment of existence is celebrated in this music. And I don’t think you get there without the dedication and the willingness to engage that “possibility space,” the imaginal space of, can this song be an ode to the Creator, whatever that is, whoever that is, however you want to define that. And to me, that is a real sacred thing that music can do. And I feel like your guys’ stuff, you guys have been on an incredible run and everything’s coming out. And I love the unified visual aesthetic that gets applied, feels so Blue Note/Impulse to me, that sort of catalog thing. And I feel like you guys are really doing some incredible stuff, and I agree with you entirely. If it had been called something other than Jazz is Dead, a lot of people might not be having conversations like this one about the project. You know what I mean?

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: Yeah. Thank you.

AD: Yeah. Well, I really appreciate you guys taking the time. And before we go with our very last little bit, I was curious, in 2018, you both appeared in the Marvel series, Luke Cage, I think your guys’ work was featured. I’m not so up on the MCU these days. I kind of got a little thrown off that, but comic books remain a huge, huge fascination. So I just wanted to ask on our way out, were you guys Marvel or DC guys when you were younger?

Adrian Younge: When I was younger, I feel like I was more Marvel than DC. Definitely more Marvel than DC. It is crazy when you say something like that because I look back and I wonder why was I so much into comic books and baseball cards and basketball cards? And not to say it’s whack or anything, it’s just that I’m far away from it right now. I wonder why I was into it so much? You know what I’m saying? I love it. I mean, I think they’re dope, but it’s just like, I’m not obsessed like I was, but when I was younger, I was more of a Marvel dude for sure.

Ali Shaheed Muhammad:  I wasn’t really that much into comic books. You asking me that question. The only thing that comes to mind is I definitely had some Incredible Hulk, and I had some Spider-Man, so I guess I was dabbling in the worlds.

Adrian Younge:  What underwear did you have, bro? Spider-Man or Hulk bro, or Captain America?

Ali Shaheed Muhammad:  Nah, I didn’t have the Underoos and all that, man I wasn’t that.

Adrian Younge: You never went like this to be Spider-Man, to try to act like you were swinging, bro?

Ali Shaheed Muhammad: Nah, and plus my mom, her budget level wasn’t even tolerating any kind of conversation of you want what? It’s like I knew better to ask my mom something like that. That’s what I had to deal with. I had to deal with the traditional tighty whities, you know what I’m saying?

AD: Well, I didn’t think we were going to even get into underwear in this podcast, but I’m so glad that we took things into a place that none of us had imagined. But no, seriously, guys, thank you so much for taking your time. It’s really been a pleasure. Hanging out with you guys and getting a chance to talk about this great music. So thanks so much.

Adrian Younge: Thank you, Jason.

Adrian Younge:  Appreciate it. Thank you so much. See you later.

 

 
 Posted on February 26, 2025March 4, 2025Adrian Younge Ali Shaheed Muhammada Podcast
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });