# You Should Pay Rent In My Mind: Guy Picciotto | The Aquarium Drunkard Interview

_2024-10-02_ · by Justin Gage · `interview`
**Tags:** Fugazi, Guy Picciotto, Mixtapes

[source](https://aquariumdrunkard.com/2024/10/02/you-should-pay-rent-in-my-mind-guy-picciotto-the-aquarium-drunkard-interview/)

## Links
- Bandcamp: https://fugazi.bandcamp.com/album/red-medicine

## Body

Fugazi are a band from Washington DC. Having never officially broken up they have been on an extended hiatus since 2003. Although their methods of operations were intrinsic to the band and have been widely focused on in the hyperbolic discourse surrounding them, Fugazi was and is always about the music. Although not what most would consider “fusion,” fuse is what this music truly does. Drawing on a wide variety of influences, from the dankest dub to gnarly garage punk, to free noise to delicate balladry, the band synthesized a new form of music that was entirely their own. Each record were missives that revealed new worlds which always felt like you were growing with them with each release.

In 1995 the band released Red Medicine which to us here at AD was a radical shift in the band’s recorded trajectory. The arrangements grew more complex, the studio-as-instrument ethos becoming fully realized with more extreme textures. From lo-fi abstractions to widescreen feedback, to moments of tender beauty, the overall feel of the album felt more personal, even down to the packaging itself. To these ears it stands as a fulcrum which opened vistas in which the next records would further expand upon. We recently sat down with band member Guy Picciotto for wide ranging talk about the album. | Ilyas Ahmed

Aquarium Drunkard: There was a moment in time between In On The Killtaker and Red Medicine when underground culture got co-opted by the mainstream in a real way. Fugazi had put out a record at what felt like the beginning of that, and then there were a crazy few years between Killtaker and Red Medicine, and then Red Medicine comes out kind of on the other side of it. As a band that plays a certain kind of music with guitars, how much of that zeitgeist affected the actual compositional process for the record?

Guy Picciotto: I would say zero. Approaching zero. I think lyrically the only song that maybe references that whole situation would be “Target”, but musically we were really in our own world in terms of the way that we worked. We had already been a band since ’87, but in some ways we became a band again with this record, in a different way, for many different reasons, but not many of them had to do with the atmosphere outside of D.C. The way we were functioning, particularly then, and really the whole time we were a band, it was as if there was a cone over the city, and a cone within the cone around the band, and we always were operating within our own creative atmosphere. We had to deal with things getting bigger, which likely affected the shows more than it affected the music writing or the recording of the music. In terms of the shows, we had to learn how to play at a different scale, and that was more of a challenge on a practical level, just to somehow manage to move the practical infrastructure of the way the band worked into a bigger scale without changing anything, but we also had to figure out how sonically to play in bigger spaces and then that changed how we played guitar and how we played with each other because we were playing with increased volume and less ability to feed off the crowd. We had to learn to feed off each other. There was this new kind of listening and improvisational thing that started to happen much more around that time. But in terms of composition you can really see how this record was created if you watch the Instrument documentary. We had just bought a bunch of recording equipment and were learning how to engineer for ourselves.



googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1421705426819-0'); });


One thing that is a useful resource if you’re trying to think about this is to look at the Fugazi live series and see what we were doing between 1993 and ’96, In ’93 we toured for almost six months or maybe more. The big thing that happened is when Brendan left D.C. for the first time and moved to Seattle and that was hugely jarring and shocking for us as a band. We had been working non-stop for six or seven years. Brendan wanted to be with his girlfriend who was studying in the Pacific Northwest where he has a lot of family, and decided he was going to leave, not break up the band, but needed to take a break. But when he left, for me personally, it was a pretty shocking situation as we had been playing music together since we were fifteen or sixteen years old. We were now 29 years old and it felt like adult concerns had entered the conversation that had previously never been on the radar. Those were the kind things that were more affecting our mindset than anything to do with what was happening with the corporate stuff because we just weren’t involved with it. We lived in a town with group houses with all our favorite bands… Nation Of Ulysses had a group house called The Embassy, we had a group house called the Pirate House. We were in this self-sustaining creative world that we had created for ourselves that was incredibly interesting and inspiring. It just wasn’t that interesting what was going on a larger scale. We were much more interested in Bikini Kill coming to town, which had a huge impact. The stuff Nation Of Ulysses was doing had a huge impact, as did Slant 6 and other bands. Seeing The Ex, from Amsterdam, and becoming friends with them — that had a huge impact.

AD: You were talking about how much you toured in 1993. I’m pretty sure I saw you twice on that tour, both times with Shudder To Think opening, when they were playing shit off the Pony Express record before it came out and that stuff was so disjointed, and I always wondered if that rubbed off in some capacity.

Guy Picciotto: Oh, we loved them. Also, Unrest was another huge band for me and I think you can hear that on “Do You Like Me”. Since we weren’t touring that much in ’94, we did spend a lot of time working on demos and working on the songs. Even some of the songs we had been playing as instrumentals in ’93, as we never curtailed what we played in terms of when the records came out, we were already working on songs in ’93 that would come out later. It’s always a mishmash of playing stuff that would eventually get recorded. So by the time 1995 came around we had already been working on those songs for over a year, and Brendan had come back so there was this real sense of joy and, as you can see in the movie when we were recording the record, we were having so much fun just being around each other. It felt really productive, and then, also it was the first time we felt confident enough to engineer and produce it ourselves. We’d had absolutely great experiences with Ted Nicely, who had been our producer in the past, but it just felt kind of liberating to just be, like, “I don’t know if this is good or bad but this is what we like”. I always want to be very careful, as Ted is one of my best friends and working with him was absolutely huge for me, but there is this moment when you start learning a few things about engineering and you have these thrills not unlike when you start developing a facility on an instrument, and you start to get that kind of excitement about feeling confident with the board. It no longer feels radioactive if you touch it.

AD: I’m not at all trying to imply that those earlier records were bad, or sound bad, or anything like that, it’s more the shift— this record just felt more personal, and has a certain texture to it. I’m going to backtrack for a moment. It’s really interesting to me that you were saying that in ’93 and ’94 that you were playing bigger places, and Red Medicine is not a bigger sounding record but more expansive sounding. One of the things that stands out for me about the record is that it has some of the most extreme music you guys had done up to that moment, but also some of the most tender moments. The band interaction on Red Medicine is crazy — the level of detail on it, it’s so much more nuanced.

Guy Picciotto: It really took me a long time to learn different things on guitar, and I feel like as the band progressed I started to become more confident, strictly from playing so much. I had been a guitar player earlier in my other bands, but starting in this group as not a guitar player and then moving back to guitar, you can hear in the records the incremental development of how that worked. I actually listened to the record today for the first time in a long time to get ready for this, and the one part that I didn’t really remember, and was really struck by, was listening to “By You” and listening to way the guitars — it’s improvised noise shit — but it’s actually a lot more conversational than I remember it.

AD: It’s like an improv record. It’s not just random noise.

Guy Picciotto: There’s some shit happening in it that’s like morse code and the feedback’s finding each other … and think that was a product of from playing so much and learning to control a hollow body guitar at extreme volume and then trying to learn to corral it.

Do you know this band Latin Playboys from LA? I feel like that band, particularly their first record, had a huge impact on me. It’s guys from Los Lobos and Mitchell Froom, the producer. I was at a record store in D.C. and they were playing it over the sound system and I was like what the fuck… just the texture of it. It wasn’t just like this is lo-fi and this is hi-fi, it was this incredible blend of the high and low, and it was so incredibly unique and interesting. There’s a few records that shifted my perspective, there’s that, there’s the Fall’s This Nation’s Saving Grace, which has a lot of big to small, like boombox sound to big sound, kind of movement. So those two records in particular were sort of in our heads and when it came time for us to assemble the record…

AD: Did you guys know you were going to do the segue stuff?

Guy Picciotto: What I think what happened was that sometime during the mixing, but it might have been before, we had all the songs recorded and we had “Version” — which was the most extreme dub experiment we had attempted — and we knew that that was texturally different. But there was this feeling of loss, as we had been doing so much home recording, and with pieces that never became songs but to me seemed as important as anything we were releasing as music or real songs, or whatever, and I just had this real pang. I often use this analogy about groups: it’s like an iceberg, and what’s above the surface of the water is what everyone thinks the band is but there is so much underneath the surface of the water that is what it is to the people in the band — the rehearsals, your own conception of what the group is, sonics that only you hear, live things that are ephemeral that only you remember. All this stuff that is under the surface that you feel is really true, that never gets reflected in terms of what the public perception of a band is. Fugazi, for me, is an extreme example of the iceberg above the surface being just a tiny triangle and I just feel like I never see reflected back what I think the band really is and it’s really frustrating.

AD: It’s amazing you are saying that as one of the things I have written down is that this is the first record where you start to see the life beyond the canvas, which is what you were talking about with the iceberg analogy. The segue pieces, which don’t feel random and feel very much a part of the songs, don’t in any way come off as some random shit. There’s a narrative to it.

Guy Picciotto: There’s also a rhythm. The thing about those segues is, they are not just sonic collisions. They are edited rhythmically to be sensical. We worked the fuck out of those edits. It wasn’t like ‘oh, we’ll just grab a piece of this practice shit’, particularly, say for example, the one at the beginning of the record. That’s a boombox recording of a song that we were working on, and we fucking loved the way it sounded, but it never became a song. The idea of editing that on the beat going into the beginning of “Do You Like Me”, the minute that we did it we were just like laughing so hard because it’s such a fucked up way to start a record. You just knew people were going to be like “what the fuck ?”. But then when you put them together you have a whole other thing and it takes the sweetness of “Do You Like Me” and it kind of complicates it in a way that makes the whole thing more interesting.

AD: How much stuff did you have to sift through in order to match them up with the songs?

Guy Picciotto: That one, for example, there was no sifting to be done because we just loved it and it was like a known piece that we had and it was alone on a cassette. We knew we loved it, but knew it was not going to develop into a song, and that became the perfect way to use that kind of stuff. There is another one at the beginning of “Downed City” and that was just another little practice moment but what you can hear behind it is that there is something going wrong with the 4-track so there is a backwards thing happening underneath it. We just loved that little thing and thought where can we put this. We really thought so much about sequencing and flow. The segues acted as some kind of mustard gas or poison air to shift the perspective a bit.

AD: Once you started doing that were there any songs where you did something specifically as an intro for a specific song? Like the beginning of “Birthday Pony” with the piano and the laughter… did you ever make something up specifically as an intro?

Guy Picciotto: No, we didn’t. We never thought, ok, now we are going intentionally reverse engineer this concept that we’ve come up with. The thing that’s at the beginning of “Birthday Pony” is just audio of us playing the song at Guilford House when we were demo-ing it. Brendan wrote the basic bass part on piano so he was sitting at the piano and we were all kind of playing the song together, so you can hear the piano part at the beginning where he is feeling it out, singing and being a joker and we’re just recording it. We just wanted to tie in the origin of the song to the actual studio version that we recorded a year later, so that one was obvious to put together as it was source material.

AD: So you guys would demo whole songs?

Guy Picciotto: Oh, my God. The Guilford tapes that we have … “Version” is one song that is complete from the Guilford tapes but there is also a version of “Bed For The Scraping” where I’m singing the lyrics from “Fell Destroyed” on top of it. So there’s a whole version of that, me singing “Bed For The Scraping” with these alternate lyrics.  So that and just so many more songs.

AD: Have you guys ever thought about putting any of that stuff out?

Guy Picciotto: We have. We have just so much stuff. Some of it was done is the studio, some are demos, and then we obviously have the entire Albini record that never came out. The ones that are the most precious to me are like the Guilford tapes, I think, and the ones from my mom’s basement where we were doing stuff. Ian has been archiving and collecting all this material and going through all the tapes and there are hundreds of hours.

AD: That’s amazing to have the foresight to document and hold on to everything like that.

Guy Picciotto: It was part of our working and writing process. So much of it was about our rehearsals which were really long. When we were writing we would rehearse every day for five hours. When we were rehearsing for tour we would practice every single song we ever wrote off a huge master list on the wall so that we could improvise the sets with no set list as we went.  To do that we had to know all the songs cold so that was days and days of running the whole master list over and over.

AD: Which makes Brendan leaving town even wilder to think about, just in terms of the dynamics as a working band.

Guy Picciotto: In a sense we were kind of inefficient in terms of the way our creativity worked. We really labored. It wasn’t like one person would come in with an idea, show it to everybody, and there we have it, let’s move on to the next thing. It was never like that. Someone would bring in a scrap and then everyone would stretch it and twist. It was such a laborious process, but for me it was hugely enjoyable, but at a certain point to be in a band that way is very demanding and kind of limits what you can do with the rest of your life. (laughs) We were always thinking about Black Flag, that was a model for us. They would practice every day for 6-10 hours and then they would do things like “trudge” their songs which means play the songs at crawling tempos just to force themselves to learn every accent in slow motion so that when they sped it up everyone would know the dimensions at a different speed which is a very hard thing to do. I know because we tried that too.

AD: That’s the other thing about this record, this was the record that felt like Tetris parts. A lot of it almost feels like almost a hip-hop cut ’n paste kind of thing. And not randomly, you’re putting stuff together and making it fit in a way that you can’t imagine any of the pieces not being there. They all need each other to be the song. And like you said, it’s a lot of work.

Guy Picciotto: It is a lot of work. All the songs are very different and also every single person in the band is a songwriter, basically. Like a song like “Do You Like Me”, that came out of a song that I just wrote on an acoustic guitar to play at a party, it wasn’t supposed to be a Fugazi song, but Ian was at the party and heard me do it and said wow, we should play that. When the band descended upon it, then it went from having this certain shape to becoming more three dimensional. So I think for the first time we were really thinking about the shape and the space. Not just dynamically, which was always a part of the band, but in terms of the architecture.

AD: Right, it’s not a fixed position, it’s coming and going in every direction. I always wondered, were you making solo recordings at the time as well?

Guy Picciotto: Brendan had this Tascam 234 4-track cassette player, which we would use before we got the 8-track, and it kind of lived in the basement of this group house I was living in. Everyone would go to sleep, and it would be like four in the morning, and as I had terrible insomnia, I would just record all of my songs on an acoustic guitar which is what I composed on. You can listen to the “Rend It” demo — that’s an example of what my demos sounded like before the band came in. For example, on “Cassavetes”, that would sound like a country song being played on an acoustic guitar while I’m trying to work out the lyrics. Even “Target” was a demo that I started on 4-track. There was an enormous amount of recording both individually and also within the band before we actually went into the studio. I have just a shitload of cassettes. A lot of it is lyrical too. When you are so tired — for me that was really productive lyrically,  to be just so exhausted that my rational brain was kind of fracturing as I would be singing. I would later go back and pillage from what was coming out.

AD: I was curious about whether there were things that you were reading that influenced your lyric writing at that time? Your lyrics feel very specific to you. You have a very specific way of approaching lyric writing, and especially on this record. Was there anything at that time that you felt was an influence on you lyric-wise?

Guy Picciotto: I don’t think there was anything in particular. When I was younger, before I was in Fugazi, writing lyrics was this cathartic, gushing, kind of thing. I don’t even remember thinking about it particularly, I just had all this stuff. But then once I was in Fugazi it was interesting because I felt like I couldn’t write that way anymore. That resource was spent, whatever it had been, it was gone. So then I was thinking about it kind of more, not just politically, but for example how do I write politically in a way that feels as complicated as the way that I think about those things without it just becoming merely anthemic. Is there another way to do this. I think a lot my stuff for lyrics is about rhythm. I guess the one thing I can say is that around this time I had been given these poems by Gerard Manley Hopkins, and it’s not even the meaning of those poems, but there was something about the alliteration and the rhythm of it that I just found really amazing. I think that is the only thing I can point to maybe as some kind of inspiration. In hip-hop, the flow or whatever, that kind of thing that people talk about a lot … there was something about Bob Dylan and hip-hop vocals. Just a rhythmic placement because a lot of playing guitar and singing, especially when you’re singing that hard and you don’t have full control of your voice, a lot of it has to do with spacing and punctuation and doing something unexpected with the rhythm, so I think a lot of that is in my head when I am writing lyrics.

AD: Related to that, as you wrote the music before the lyrics, it must have been a nightmare to figure out how you’re going to sing over something like “Latest Disgrace” that’s such an odd guitar part. It’s like a Captain Beefheart-y kind of thing. How do you sing over that? I’m just assuming you just have to practice it …

Guy Picciotto: You have to practice it. But “Bed For The Scraping”, for example, I thought I want to fucking sing on this song, but the guitar part is maniacal, and when it came time to actually try to do it over and over again, I was like I can’t do this, it’s not physically possible for me to play this insane tapping thing and sing at this intensity, so we knew that Ian had to sing it so that’s why that one got passed over to Ian, and a lot of times it was stuff like that.

“Latest Disgrace” was one of the few bass parts I wrote, and it’s funny that you say Captain Beefheart because to me I was thinking like Public Image or something like that. But now when I listen to it, it is kind of fucking weird, but it seemed natural to me at the time. I don’t really play bass that often because there needs to be more chaos in my playing and bass needs to be so on it and I just can’t relate to it, but that is one that I did write the bass part for. It’s funny about the lyrics because I think a lot of these songs were actually pretty personal. There are some lines on this record, and I don’t often feel this way about lyrics, but there are some on here that I’m still fond of.

AD: Within the dense wordplay in your songs there would always be the banger line — the line that pops. Sort of like a hip-hop thing where you have the banger line and then you have this other stuff going on which segues into something else. As complex as the arrangements were getting within the band it was still so hooky. And I feel with Fugazi people never talk about this enough — this stuff is filled with hooks. It’s not pop-punk but it’s also not not pop.

Guy Picciotto: Ian is the hook-master. If you think about Minor Threat, out of all the hardcore bands that came out of that scene, their songs are so catchy. There is something about the sing-ability of those songs. I think a lot of it comes down to both him and Brendan growing up playing piano. The piano has a lot of information in terms of the way it can wire your brain if you play it at a young age, which I didn’t do. I feel like they have a very specific sensibility about note placement and where things go, and Ian has a facility for hooks, and, like you said, even lyric hooks like “you’d make a great cop, you fucking pig” — that’s a total hook. For me, on this record, the only thing I’ll say about lyrical hooks, and I don’t know the answer to this question, but I’ve often wondered about it, was in “Do You Like Me” I wrote the line “you should pay rent in my mind.” As far as I know it had not been said before — but now you see “oh, you’re living rent free in my head”, you see that everywhere, but I defy anyone to find an example of it before 1995. I find it a little hard to believe that people got it from a Fugazi record because I just don’t think that many people would know the song, but I do feel like it is an odd thing. I remember writing that song and those lyrics just kind of spilling out and thinking ‘oh, that’s kind of a good line’.

AD: It’s a good one. It’s one of the ones that sticks out.

Guy Picciotto: It makes me sad now because I think people would hear those lyrics and think they’re just so commonplace. I’d be curious to have some sort of linguistic expert tell me what the deal is. (laughs)

AD: One of the other things I was thinking about that kind of relates to what we were talking about in terms of the recording and the arrangements, when Brendan wasn’t in town and you were writing this stuff

One of the shifts of this record feels like it’s not necessarily something that the band is going to be able to reproduce live. This was the record that felt like the atmosphere was so specific to the recording, and not just the segue pieces, but the actual sound of the record. Was that something that went through your minds at all? Even if that means just saying fuck it, we’re going to make this as a document that is different from the live band.

Guy Picciotto: We never wrote without Brendan, aside from demo-ing individually. He would come back and we would work. In terms of band writing we weren’t getting together without him, not at all. But I do remember having phone conversations with Ian where we were having existential panic attacks as we had been so used to a very specific type of schedule and all of a sudden we were off the schedule and just didn’t know what the fuck to do. All the Guilford stuff that we worked on Brendan was there, and certainly everything at my house. The only stuff that would have been different from that would have just been the 4-track demos that I was making on my own.

In terms of your other question, we used to say that the records were the menu and the show was the meal. That was our approach to it. But I do think that around this time we did start thinking why not let the studio be an instrument in and of itself, not unlike dub music or something. But there was never a moment where we planned on reproducing, say, the segue material at the beginning of “Do You Like Me” and have it be part of the song, as we didn’t think of that as necessarily being part of the song, we thought of it being separate from the song but assembled into a collage as part of the record. The record we thought of as collage, but the show was something different. And live, due to the improvisational nature, we were in no way beholden to what was on the record either — we would take the songs and do whatever the fuck we wanted with them depending on whatever was happening that night. Whatever connective tissue there was between the records and the shows was pretty severed by this point. Our relationship with the songs is much more about the way in which we worked them out live than it was about the records. When we worked on the records it was a very focused creative enterprise, but, quite frankly, by the time the records came out I don’t think any of us were even listing to them or thinking about them in any way at all as for us it was all about the show.

AD: It seems like Red Medicine clearly set a precedent for how you were going to work after that. It feels like that was a moment where you found a template of how to work. Using the ‘the records are the menu’ metaphor, now that the band is no longer a live entity, does that make you feel differently about the recordings? Are you able to listen to them and appreciate them as a document — as a record in and of itself — separate from being a live band now?

Guy Picciotto: I don’t know if I can do that necessarily except in micro-fragments. Like today, listening to “By You” … I sometimes forget, you know. “Fell Destroyed”, for example, I don’t remember that that’s the way that I sang it. It’s kind of conversational on the record whereas live it became something completely different.  I didn’t even remember that I sang it the way I sang it on the record until I listened to it again today and I was like, oh, that’s some weird shit.

AD: The way you sang on Red Medicine is radically different. I was 22 when it came out, and I remember the staunch hardcore kids being like “he’s singing falsetto!” and being really upset about it. That was a thing. And it’s funny to think about this stuff now as everything is aesthetically permitted.

Listening to it a lot over the past couple of weeks I was remembering all these things surrounding the time it came out but now I can hear it very separate from that as that context is gone in a lot of ways.

Guy Picciotto: Yeah, the singing thing is weird. When you come out of punk rock or hardcore or whatever, there was just no intentionality about being a singer or an understanding of yourself as being a vocalist. For example, when I recorded the Rites Of Spring record I never sang in practice. I never even thought about what the singer is supposed to be doing. It was just a cathartic release. The idea that I would critique it one way or another … it was more like, “do you think I’m actually thinking about this ?” (laughs), I don’t know what the fuck I’m doing, I just want to be alive, be alive right now, here, doing this. There was kind of an extreme lack of self-consciousness that was happening when I first started playing music that had really changed by this point, but even now I listen to the record and I think it’s strange, some of the singing. I don’t really know where it comes from.

My dad’s an Italian citizen and was raised in the Middle East and he had a fairly strong accent. I grew up speaking French from his side of the family as it was spoken in Syria and Lebanon where he grew up. So, for me, I listen to this stuff sometimes and realize I don’t actually sound like a normal American person but it never occurred to me at the time. On this record, and a few other records, I started putting French into the songs sometimes because I love the language, I read the language, I speak the language. I thought why can’t this be another piece of everything anyway ?  And people would be like “oh, that’s pretentious” or that’s this or that. But you know what’s pretentious ? Thinking there is only one fucking language in the world. But I knew it bothered people, the same way the falsetto bothered people, but I think at this point the band was deeply committed to being like, hey, we don’t give a fuck.

AD: The band was so shrouded in mystery too at that time due to the lack of accessibility to media and the way you guys would interact with it. I wonder now, if you’re a kid, if this exists. At that time for you to sing in French for a line on the record, for people like me, it was yet another level of the mystery to the band. It’s interesting to think about.

Guy Picciotto: Yeah, for sure. I think for both Ian and myself… you have your own interior language, your own ways of speaking, everybody does. Everybody has their own ways of speaking, their own rhythms and accents. I’m an incredibly malleable person. My accent tends to change all the time depending on where I am or what country I’m in or what the fuck’s happening. When you said the thing about fixed position, there is no fixed position and often times there is not even a fixed position in terms of your intention anymore. You think you are doing one thing and you are doing another thing. You are blind to the thing you are expressing. Some of the songs on this record, I feel really exposed or vulnerable reading them now but I’m not even sure if anyone else even fucking gets them. But now reading them it feels like ‘oh, shit’ you know. So, it’s weird, it’s a weird thing.

AD: There is that John Lennon quote that’s something like ‘there’s the record you want to make, the record you make, and the record you wish you made.’

Guy Picciotto: And also the weird fucking record that people are hearing that is not actually the record that exists. We spent an entire career where the record would come out and the reviews would be like “more hardcore thrash from the masters of blah blah blah…”. It’s funny , nowadays I think people have one of two ideas about Fugazi — either they have zero fucking idea who we are and think we have no place in the modern culture, or people think that we were a highly respected institution. The truth is at the time, critically speaking, the band was almost a joke to people because of what people conceived of as the “great sincerity’ of our project — being didactic and stupid. A lot of people think like the ‘90s whole selling out vs. not selling out thing is laughable now, there is a sense that it was a dodo bird of a concept, but there was a lot of real practical mentality behind it. The same thing kind of happened with Riot Grrrl — there was this kind of mockery around it and the things that they were doing. It wasn’t even just misogynist, it was just so cynical. Like a kind of nihilism …like, “oh, you think something matters?”. Now we live in a political situation in which it’s quite obvious why things matter, but to be honest with you they did back then too. It’s very weird.

AD: It is very weird. If you talk to younger people now, and try to explain the climate of that specific time period and the broad idea of selling out, there is just no context for it. It feels like it evaporated .. this specific moment of time.

Guy Picciotto: The underground infrastructure that had been built over a decade that was fundamental to everything in terms of me ever being able to do anything that I had done … the idea that it was just disposable and should just be put it the trash can the minute someone with a checkbook shows up was not only laughable it was so obviously a mistake. Why once we had established something – why not continue to build on what we are working on because it’s obviously functioning. It’s ridiculous. Was there anything that Fugazi couldn’t do because of the decisions we had made? The answer to that is no. We could literally do whatever the fuck we wanted to do. A lot of it had to do with economics. I was living in a room that costs $200 a month. People think we made sacrifices. There were no fucking sacrifices, it was fucking great. It was the greatest time of my life. I couldn’t have been happier and it was awesome. When I was working two jobs and doing the band on the side it was also still awesome. Sometimes I do wonder why people think we were missing out on something.

AD: You weren’t missing out on anything. You were making the thing… I know exactly what you’re talking about.

Guy Picciotto: On some levels we were, I wouldn’t say lucky, but we had more than enough work on our plates to self-generate, but also it was just such a fertile time. And to take all of that creative energy and fertility and to just give it away for some fucking magic beans just makes no fucking sense (laughs). And this is totally not a critique of what anyone else decided to do – and this is one thing that we were always stressing at the time – bands made a lot of decisions, including a lot of our very close friends, that were completely different from the decisions that we made. Never was it like ‘you guys suck’ or ‘fuck you’, it was not a judgmental thing. It was more like a practical decision making concept that we had within the band that we really shared. But it didn’t matter if other people liked it or agreed with us or didn’t agree with us, Some bands made decisions that were completely different than ours and were artistically and ethically really productive and cool. It’s not binary, but at the same time I don’t want to suggest that thinking about these things doesn’t matter. Like now, for example, licensing songs is a huge part of the way artists make income, I understand that part of it. But when you make these decisions you can’t expect it to be a meaningless transaction, you just can’t expect it to be an evaporating reality because music is an associative thing and the way you are imprinted by music and the way sits in your memory and your thoughts and your feelings when you hear it is real. “Lust For Life” by Iggy Pop has been somewhat ruined for me, it’s just a fact, the song has been kind of ruined for me. There was a time when I would listen to the rhythm of that song and I would think could there be anything greater than this? And now it doesn’t have that meaning anymore. Like, how did this happen? Is it because it was part of a Carnival Cruise ad? Or is it overfamiliarity? I don’t know what the real answer is, but I find it mysterious and really strange. I want to protect the music I was involved in, not because I think it’s the greatest thing in the fucking world or that we were geniuses, it’s not the White Album, but for me it is my life’s work and I would want it to still have valences that are unpredictable in the world. That’s all.

AD: That’s beautifully put, and to some people it is their White Album and the records stand as testaments to being invited into a world you are welcome to be a part of where you are not being judged one way or another. For lots of people I know, from the most experimental music people to rock bro dudes, to everything in between, when you say Fugazi it is very much still a thing. It’s something to be proud of I think.

Guy Picciotto: Within the band there was such a wide tent of aspirations and influences and where we were coming from … certainly none of that music would have been made individually. I find bands so interesting in terms of why they work or why certain personalities work. I think on paper Fugazi should not have been a functioning group as there was almost too much productive energy, but for some reason there was a lot of generosity to each other within the group – allowing everyone’s full palette to be utilized. A lot of times you have bands where you can really sense people feeling the squeeze or people being secondary or marginalized within the context of the group. I was in a lot of bands before Fugazi that I loved so much, and every group has its own kind of fingerprints. It’s like a Rubik’s Cube where you try and get all the things to click into place. I find it fascinating. The greater-than-the-sum-of-its-parts thing is such a cliche, but there really is something beautiful about that hovering, alternate aura — the steam that comes off the people involved. It’s just a different thing.

AD: Yes. It’s just that. The mysterious 5th member.

Red Medicine session photos by Jem Cohen, courtesy of Dischord Records.

 

 
 Posted on October 2, 2024October 7, 2024Fugazi Guy Picciotto The AD Interview
 

 
 
 googletag.cmd.push(function() { googletag.display('div-gpt-ad-1361039829957-0'); });